Applicant checklist for the Ontario Workforce Priority Stream
On this pageSkip this page navigation
Summary
Guidelines for uploading supporting documents
Applicant Consent Form
Identity documents
Status documents in Canada
Education documents
Language test results
Licensing or authorization documents
Pay slips
Work history documents
Resumé
Intention to live and work in Ontario documents
Expression of interest scoring factors documents
Changes in personal information
Disclaimer
Contact us
Summary
When applying to the Ontario Workforce Priority stream, you may be required to scan and upload copies of the following documents. The mandatory documents you need to upload may be different depending on if you applied with a job offer, or as a self-employed physician.

Applicant Consent Form
identity documents
status in Canada documents
education documents
language test results
documents to support your work history
licensing or authorization documents
pay slips
resumé
expression of interest (EOI) selection factors
other optional documents
Self-employed physicians who are eligible to apply without a job offer are also required to provide:

a copy of their Certificate of Registration with the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario
proof of their OHIP billing number registration
All documents are mandatory unless otherwise stated. Please do not include additional, non-mandatory documents as this will delay the processing of your application. You may be asked to submit additional documents during the processing of your application.

Guidelines for uploading supporting documents
Scan and upload all your supporting documents into your online application.

Make sure all your supporting documents are clear and legible. We will not accept documents that are blurry or illegible.

Your supporting documents must be uploaded using one of the accepted document formats:

.doc
.docx
.xls
.xlsx
.ppt
.pptx
.pdf
.rtf
.txt
.jpeg
.bmp
.png
.gif
.tiff
File size limits
The maximum file size is 10 MB per document.

Scan your documents at a lower resolution to reduce the size of your documents and allow for a faster upload.

All pages of a specific document should be uploaded into one file (if the size limit permits).

Applicant Consent Form
Complete, sign and upload the Applicant Consent Form to the Required Documents section of the application.

Do this after:

you have received an invitation to apply
you have reviewed the correctness of your application in the e-filing portal
If you have an immigration representative, they must not sign the Applicant Consent Form on your behalf.

Identity documents
1. Photograph
You must upload a photograph of yourself with your application. The photograph must:

be a scanned copy of a physical photo or a digital photo
meet passport or visa photo specifications
We will not accept a photograph:

of the personal details page of your passport
that is not clear or is of low quality
2. Passport
You must scan and upload a copy of the personal details page of your passport and all pages that contain Canadian visas and entry stamps.

3. Your family members’ passports
If you have dependent family members, you must scan and upload copies of the personal details page from the passport of each dependent family member. A dependent family member can include your spouse or common-law partner, your children under the age of 22 and their children.

Status documents in Canada
If applicable, you must scan and upload copies of current and previous status documents given to you by Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) or the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA). Documents may include:

work permits
study permits
temporary resident visas
any other Canadian immigration document
If you currently have maintained status, scan and upload a copy of one of the following:

the letter from IRCC acknowledging that they received your application to extend your status
the IRCC fee receipt
the post office mailing receipt you received when you applied to extend your status (if applicable)
Education documents
Recent Ontario graduate
If you are a recent Ontario graduate, you must scan and upload a copy of:

your education degree, diploma or graduate certificate (also known as your education credential) earned from an eligible college or university in Ontario
your official transcripts issued by the college or university in Ontario that granted your education credential
Canadian credential
If you completed your studies in Canada from an eligible academic institution, you must scan and upload:

a copy of your degree granted from an academic institution in Canada
a copy of your official transcripts issued from the Canadian academic institution that granted the degree
If you don’t have your credential yet
If you don’t have your educational credential yet, you must scan and upload a copy of:

your official letter (on institution letterhead) from the college or university in Ontario or Canada which will be granting your degree, diploma or graduate certificate confirming that:
program requirements have been successfully completed
there are no outstanding fees to be paid and
the scheduled date on which your educational credential will be granted
your official transcripts issued from the college or university in Ontario or Canada that granted your educational credential
Foreign credential
If you completed your studies outside of Canada, you must get an Educational Credential Assessment (ECA) report that proves your education is equivalent to a Canadian degree.

The assessment must be done by one of the following organizations, designated by IRCC.

Comparative Education Service – University of Toronto School of Continuing Studies
International Credential Assessment Service of Canada
International Credential Evaluation Service
International Qualifications Assessment Service
Medical Council of Canada (professional body for doctors)
Pharmacy Examining Board of Canada (professional body for pharmacists)
World Education Services
Each organization charges a different fee and has different processing times. Please check the website of each ECA organization to choose the one that is best for you.

You must provide the OINP with an electronic copy of the ECA report when you submit your online application. The report cannot be more than 5 years old at the time you submit your application.

How to authorize the OINP to confirm your ECA results
We must be able to confirm your ECA results with the organization that completed it. This means you must authorize the organization to share the results with OINP electronically.

Do not request a duplicate paper copy from your ECA organization to be mailed out to the OINP.

It is not enough to authorize the organization to share the results of your assessment with IRCC for the purposes of your application to the OINP.

World Education Services
To authorize the OINP to see your ECA results from the World Education Services:

Order a copy of your ECA report online
Indicate the “Ontario Immigrant Nominee Program” as the recipient of the report
Comparative Education Services
To authorize the OINP to see your ECA results from the Comparative Education Service, review the instructions for your request.

Medical Council of Canada

To authorize the OINP to see your ECA results from the Medical Council of Canada:

Request the report.
Once it is available, log into your physiciansapply.ca account.
Click on “Other service requests” in the left panel and follow the steps to request a file transfer.
Enter ontarionominee@ontario.ca as the third party’s email address.
For the other organizations not listed above, no additional steps are required.

Please contact the ECA organization directly if you have any specific questions about the process for getting an ECA or how to authorize and share your ECA results with the OINP.

Language test results
To prove that you have the relevant language skills, scan and upload a copy of your English or French language test results with your application. The test must have been taken within the 2 years prior to submitting your application.

English tests
For English tests, we accept:

International English Language Testing System (IELTS) – we only accept the General Training test
Canadian English Language Proficiency Index Program (CELPIP) – we only accept the General test
to authorize the OINP to confirm your test results, you must select “IRCC purposes” as the reason for the test and IRCC as the receiving institution
Pearson Test of English (PTE) Core – please note we only accept the PTE Core test, not the PTE Academic test
French tests
For French tests, we accept:

Test d’évaluation de français pour le Canada (TEF Canada)
Test de connaissance du français pour le Canada (TCF Canada)
Please make sure you scan the entire page of your test results and that no text is cut off.

Licensing or authorization documents
If your job offer or Ontario work experience is in an occupation that requires a mandatory licence or other authorization in Ontario, you must scan and upload a copy of your licence or other authorization.

Pay slips
If you are currently working for the employer in the same position as your job offer, include copies of your 2 most recent pay slips.

Work history documents
Job offer
1. Employment/work experience reference letters
If your job offer is not in an occupation that requires a mandatory licence or authorization in Ontario, you must scan and upload copies of your employment/work experience reference letters for any work experience you include in your application.

Reference letters must:

be dated and printed on business letterhead
identify the business address, telephone/fax numbers, email and website addresses
include the name(s) of the responsible officer(s)/supervisor(s) and their signature(s)
dates of employment for each position you held with the employer and your job titles
detailed duties and responsibilities for each position you held
include your total annual salary plus benefits, number of hours worked per week, number of weeks of work per year and any extended periods of leave
In addition to employment/work experience reference letters, you may also submit supporting documents that describe your duties and responsibilities for each position held including job descriptions, performance reviews and job advertisements.

2. Work contracts (optional)
You may scan and upload copies of your work contracts for any work experience you include in your application.

3. Proof of compensation
You must scan and upload proof of compensation for any work experience you include in your application.

Proof may include copies of:

pay slips, pay cheques or pay statements for the first and last month of each period of work experience
bank statements showing salary deposits for the first and last month of each period of work experience
income tax documents
letters from employers confirming your annual salary/hourly wage
these letters must explain why documentation to verify compensation for work performed is not available
Self-employed physicians
Work history documents are not applicable to self-employed physicians who are eligible to apply without a job offer.

4. Canada Revenue Agency Statements
If you worked, or are currently working in Canada, you must provide tax statements relevant to any work experience you include in your application, if available.

Scan and upload copies of these statements for the relevant years:

official T4 Statements of Remuneration Paid issued by your Canadian employer(s)
Notice of Assessment (NOA) statements issued by the Canada Revenue Agency
If you do not have these documents, please include an explanation with your application.

5. Self-Employment
If you are or have been self-employed and are using this experience to meet the work experience requirement, you must scan and upload copies of the following documents (as applicable):

business registration documents or other documents to confirm business ownership
income tax returns
T4A statements (if self-employed in Canada)
reference letter(s) from client(s) and other third parties indicating the service provided along with payment details
invoices
advertisements for your business (web posting, brochures and other promotional material)
6. Other work-related documentation (optional)
If you have any other relevant documentation to support your work experience, include it with your application.

Resumé
You must scan and upload a copy of your most current resumé with your application. Your resumé should include:

your current and past work experience
education
your duties and responsibilities for each position held
current residential address
email address
phone number
Intention to live and work in Ontario documents
To demonstrate your intention to live and work in Ontario, you must list your established ties to Ontario. Ties to Ontario can include, but are not limited to, the following:

current and/or previous employment in Ontario
job offers or jobs applied to/interviewed for in Ontario
education in Ontario
volunteer work in Ontario
lease agreements for a residence in Ontario or property ownership
professional networks and affiliations
family ties
social connections or personal relationships
previous visits to Ontario
If you do not have ties to Ontario, you may provide a statement of intent that you wish to reside in Ontario.

Please carefully check your financial documents and black out any credit card numbers so they are not visible.

Failure to redact your documents will delay the processing of your application.

Expression of interest scoring factors documents
Scoring factors are not the same as stream criteria. You must meet all stream criteria and provide the mandatory documents noted above. You and your employer (if applicable) must also upload the documents noted below in support of the points you claimed in your expression of interest.

National Occupational Classification (NOC) TEER category, broad occupational category and wage
Job offer
Your employer must provide a job offer letter with description of job duties and wage with their application.

Self-employed physicians
Your medical license is sufficient to demonstrate points claimed for your occupation.

Legal status in Canada
If applicable, you must scan and upload copies of current and previous status documents given to you by IRCC or the CBSA. Documents may include:

work permits
study permits
if you currently have maintained status, scan and upload a copy of one of the following:
the letter from IRCC acknowledging that they received your application to extend your status
the IRCC fee receipt
the post office mailing receipt you received when you applied to extend your status (if applicable)
Ontario work experience
Job offer
If you claimed points for length of work experience in your job offer position or in Ontario, you or your employer must provide a work reference letter that includes dates of employment and details about your employment duties. Note that the points claimed for work in the job offer position must have been with your job offer employer in the same occupation and at the same location as your job offer.

Self-employed physicians
The points you claimed for cumulative medical practice in Ontario must be supported by remittance advice reports demonstrating payment for OHIP claims. You may also provide additional evidence like business registration documents or reference letters from third parties.

Earnings history

The points you claimed for Canadian Earnings History must be supported by a single Notice of Assessment issued by the Canada Revenue Agency in the last 5 years. You must have earned at least $30,000 in a single calendar year to receive points for this factor.

T4 slips alone will not be accepted. Combined earnings over multiple calendar years will not be accepted.

Official language ability and knowledge of official languages

If you claimed points for language ability, you must provide language test(s) obtained within the last 2 years from an approved language testing service.

English tests
For English tests, we accept one of the following:

International English Language Testing System (IELTS) — we only accept the General Training test, not the IELTS Academic or One Skill Retake tests
Canadian English Language Proficiency Index Program (CELPIP) — we only accept the General test
to authorize the OINP to confirm your test results, you must select “IRCC purposes” as the reason for the test and IRCC as the receiving institution
Pearson Test of English (PTE) Core — we only accept the PTE Core test, not the PTE Academic test
French tests
For French tests, we accept:

Test d’évaluation de français pour le Canada (TEF Canada)
Test de connaissance du français pour le Canada (TCF Canada)
Regionalization: location of job offer

Job offer
Your employer must clearly state the location of employment in the job offer they provide.

Self-employed physicians
You must provide proof of your OHIP billing number registration that shows a practice address.

Changes in personal information
You must notify us if there are any changes to the information provided in your application, including (but not limited to) changes in:

contact information
immigration status (expiration or change in work permit)
family composition due to:
marriage or common-law relationship
birth of a child
change of custody of a child
divorce/separation
death
You can make changes to your telephone number, email address and country of residence by following these steps:

Log into the OINP e-Filing Portal.
Click on “My Profile” on your main page.
Make changes to your information where needed.
Click “Save” after the change has been made.
For all other changes, or to correct a data entry error (for example if you misspelled your name):

Complete and save the Change of Personal Information form.
Send the completed form as an attachment via our webform.
If you are requesting a correction to your name or date of birth, please also include a copy of the personal details page of your passport to validate your request.
We will not accept requests to completely change a name or date of birth.

If you do not notify us of changes to your personal information, it could impact the outcome of your application.