How to use the OINP Employer Portal
Learn how to register an account, create job offers and submit applications in the Employer Portal.

Log into the Employer Portal
On this pageSkip this page navigation
Overview
Step 1: Access the portal
Step 2: Sign up for Ontario.ca Login
Step 3: Register as an employer
Important reminder
Step 4: Complete the employer profile
Step 5: Add an employer contact or additional signing officers
Step 6: Submit a job offer
Step 7: Submit an application for approval of an employment position
Navigating the Job Offer and Application Dashboard
Appointing a representative
Updating business details provided during registration
Contact us
Overview
All applications for approval of employment position under the Ontario Workforce Priority stream must be submitted via the Employer Portal. Under this employer-led process, employers can create job offers and submit applications for approval of an employment position electronically. The Employer Portal can be accessed via the OINP e-Filing Portal.

This page includes the steps you need to take on the Employer Portal to submit job offers and applications for approval of an employment position.

On this page, an employee means an employee who is registering an expression of interest (EOI) and/or applying for a certificate of nomination, as applicable.

This process is not applicable for foreign nationals seeking nomination as a self-employed physician, as these do not require an approved employment position.

Steps to apply
Employers and employees must follow this process to apply under the Ontario Workforce Priority stream.

Employer submits a “job offer”
Employers must submit a “job offer” in the Employer Portal, regardless of whether or not the employee is already in the position.

To begin the process, the employer must:

Create a Ontario.ca Login and complete the Employer Registration in the Portal.
Complete the employer profile (optional). Please note that this information will pre-populate sections of the application for approval of an employment position if the applicant is invited to apply. If left blank, the employer will need to manually enter the same information for each application submitted.
Provide information about the employee’s position by submitting a job offer.
Employee registers an EOI
Once the job offer has been submitted through the employer’s account, the employee must register an EOI within 30 calendar days. If not registered within 30 days, the job offer will expire, and a new job offer must be created for the employee to successfully register their EOI.
If invited, employer submits position for approval and employee applies
If selected, the employee will receive an invitation to apply. To complete the application:

The employer must submit an application for approval of an employment position within 14 calendar days of receipt of the invitation to apply.
The employee must submit their application within 17 calendar days of receipt of the invitation to apply.
If the employer does not apply within 14 days, the employee's application will be withdrawn. The employer will need to create a new job offer for the employee to be considered for future invitations to apply.

Once you have applied for approval of an employment position, the employee will have three additional days to make the payment and submit their application, giving them a total of 17 calendar days from the date of the invitation to submit their application.

Employers can only submit an application for approval of an employment position if the employee is invited to apply to the OINP. Creating a job offer is not the same as applying to the OINP.

Step 1: Access the portal
Before you (the employer) access the OINP Employer Portal, make sure you are using the latest version of:

Google Chrome
Mozilla Firefox
Microsoft Edge
Access the OINP e-Filing portal.

Step 2: Sign up for Ontario.ca Login
Ontario.ca Login is a Government of Ontario system that lets you sign in quickly and securely to Government of Ontario services using a single login. If you are experiencing issues accessing Ontario.ca Login, please visit their website for further assistance.

New OINP users
If you do not have an Ontario.ca Login

Access the OINP e-Filing portal and complete the reCAPTCHA.
Sign up by clicking on “Create Account”.
Once you have created an account, the system will automatically return you to the OINPe-Filing portal.
Indicate that you are a New Employer.
Returning OINP users
To sign in to the Employer Portal

Access the OINP e-Filing portal and complete the reCAPTCHA.
Log in using your Ontario.ca Login details.
Click on “New Employer”.
Step 3: Register as an employer
An authorized signing officer of the business must complete the employer registration. This means someone who has the legal authority to bind the employer at law, for example by entering into a contract or applying for a legal approval.

Do not complete the employer registration unless you have legal authority to submit an application for approval of an employment position on behalf of the employer. This means that administrative staff should not complete the employer registration.

Important reminder
Employees seeking to apply for a certificate of nomination cannot register on behalf of an employer in the Employer Portal and cannot act as a signing officer or employer contact in respect of an employer application.

If an employee seeking to apply for a certificate of nomination registers the employer or is listed as the authorized signing officer or employer contact, the application will be deemed incomplete and we will deactivate the employer account. We will also deactivate any job offers, expressions of interest and applications associated with the account.

Prior to registering an account, review the OINP’s Employer Guide to ensure that you meet program requirements.

To register as an employer:

Click ‘New Employer’ in the Employer Portal.
Review and complete the disclaimer.
Enter employer and signing officer information. Ensure this information is accurate, as it cannot be modified in the Employer Portal once registration is submitted.
Complete the declaration.
One account per employer
The OINP uses Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) business numbers to distinguish employers.

You can only create one account per employer. If an account already exists with the same CRA number, you will get an error message asking you to contact the existing registrant.

Franchisors and franchisees
Franchisors and franchisees are treated as separate employers. If you are a franchisee, you are considered the employer, not the franchisor. You will need to enter details about your business when registering.

Linking to your account
You can only register one account in the Employer Portal. This account must be linked to your legal business entity.

If your legal entity operates under multiple business names with different payroll numbers, you must submit all applications under the legal entity’s name.

Managing multiple lines of businesses
If you manage multiple lines of business under a single CRA number, use one centralized employer account.

The authorized signing officer can add employer contacts for each line of business. These contacts can:

manage their job offers
specify job offer locations and other key employment details
Disclaimer
Complete the “Disclaimer” before registering as an employer by confirming that you are an authorized signing officer for your business and that you have read and understood the criteria for registering as an employer. Please note that only the authorized signing officer for the business can complete the “Disclaimer” and proceed with the registration.

Important: Only one signing officer is allowed for each business registration and only the signing officer can add employer contacts who can help to create new job offers and applications.

Employer information
Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) number (required)
Enter your business’s CRA number. Your CRA number is a nine-digit number assigned by CRA for taxation purposes, that is unique to your business and is used when dealing with federal, provincial or local governments. This information will be used to confirm that you are the employer and to verify employer criteria.

Legal name of employer (required)
Enter your business’s legal name. Do not input your personal name.

Operating name (required)
Enter your business’s operating name, if different from the legal name.

Employer address (i.e. head office location) (required)
Enter the head office address for your business.

Phone number (required)
Enter your business’s general inquiries phone number.

Employer website (optional)
Enter your business’s website.

General inquiries email (optional)
Enter your business’s general inquiries email.

Click “Next”.

Employer authorized signing officer information
Last name (required)
Enter your last name.

First name (required)
Enter your first name.

Middle name (optional)
Enter your middle name (if applicable).

Job title (required)
Enter your official job title.

Phone number (required)
Enter your professional phone number.

E-mail (required)
This will be prepopulated based on the email address used when registering your Ontario.ca Login account and cannot be edited.

Click “Next”.

Declaration
Carefully review the declaration and confirm that you are authorized to register your employer.

Click “Confirm”.

You will receive a confirmation email once your account has been successfully created.

Step 4: Complete the employer profile
After registering your account, you will be directed to the landing page. Select the Employer Profile tile to provide information about your business. Although you can complete and edit this section at any time, it is strongly recommended that you do so as early as possible and keep the information current. The information provided here will be prepopulated in future applications for the approval of an employment position. If you leave this section blank, you will later have to enter the same information manually for each application you submit.

This section can only be completed by the signing officer or an employer contact.

The following information will be prepopulated based on the information provided in the registration and can only be edited by the OINP. If you need to make a change, contact the OINP via webform. Requests will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Please refer to Updating business details provided during registration for more information.

CRA number
legal business name
operating business name
employer address
business phone number and extension
employer website
general inquiries email
employer authorized signing officer’s name, job title, phone number and e-mail
Click “Next” to navigate to the next page.

Employer revenue and legal structure information
Date of establishment (or incorporation, if incorporated) (required)
Enter the date that your business was incorporated. If your business is not incorporated, enter the date that your business was established. This information is used to determine that your business has been active for at least three years before you applied for the approval of an employment position.

Employer legal structure (required)
Select your business’s legal structure. If you are a public sector organization, please select ‘Other’.

Incorporation/registration number (required)
Enter the incorporation or registration number of your business. If your business was incorporated or amalgamated in Ontario, the incorporation number appears on the top-right corner of the Certificate of Incorporation/Continuation or Amalgamation, or in your business’s Letters of Patent. If your business was incorporated or amalgamated outside of Ontario, this number appears in the top-right corner of the Extra-provincial Licence. If your business does not require a licence, the number is assigned upon filing the Initial Return/Notice of Change by an Extra-provincial Corporation (Form 2) with Service Ontario.

If you selected ‘Other’ in the previous question, this field will be greyed out.

Has your business been amalgamated in the last 3 years? (required)
Indicate whether your business has been amalgamated in the last 3 years.

If you answer ‘yes’, an additional text box will appear, and you will be asked to explain and provide the date of amalgamation.

If your business was amalgamated within the last 3 years, you must demonstrate that at least one of the predecessor businesses had been in continuous operation prior to amalgamation.

Has your business been active for at least 3 years? (required)
Indicate whether your business has been active for at least 3 years.

If your business is recently established in Ontario but was previously active in another province or outside Canada, you may be eligible if the business was active for at least 3 years prior to application submission.

If you purchased an existing business within the past 3 years, you must demonstrate:

that the business had been in continuous operation prior to being purchased
the purpose of the business remained the same following the purchase (that is, the same products and services continued to be provided)
Gross revenue for the most recently completed fiscal year prior to application (excluding HST/GST) (required)
In this section, you are asked to enter the amount of revenue that your business generated in the most recently completed fiscal year. You will not be asked to provide the specific amount of revenue but to provide the amount within a range.

In cases where the employee will work at more than one location, the location where the employee will ‘report to work’ means either:

the location where the employee’s immediate supervisor or manager works
the location of the administrative office where the employee will receive work assignments
Previous fiscal year start date (required)
Select the start date of the most recently completed fiscal year.

Previous fiscal year end date (required)
Select the end date of the most recently completed fiscal year.

Click “Next” to navigate to the next page.

Business details and compliance
Identify your economic sector according to the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) two-digit code (required)
Select the most appropriate NAICS code from the drop-down menu.

Description of business (goods and services offered, business activities, etc.) (required)
Provide a description of your business.

Number of business locations operating in Ontario (required)
Enter the number of business locations in Ontario.

Number of full-time employees working in all locations (required)
Enter the number of full-time employees (Canadian citizens and/or permanent residents working minimum 1,560 hours per year) working in all locations. The number of full-time employees must not include temporary foreign workers or part-time employees.

Does your business currently have outstanding orders under the Ontario Employment Standards Act 2000?
Confirm whether your business has outstanding orders under the Ontario Employment Standards Act 2000.

If you answer ‘Yes’, an additional text box will appear, and you will be asked to provide an explanation.

Does your business currently have outstanding orders under the Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act?
Confirm whether your business has outstanding orders under the Ontario Occupational Health and Safety Act.

If you answer ‘Yes’, an additional text box will appear, and you will be asked to provide an explanation.

Click “Submit” to save the information.

Step 5: Add an employer contact or additional signing officers
Signing officers may choose to add:

additional employer contacts to submit job offers and applications in the name of the employer
additional signing officers by adding them as employer contacts and “promoting” them to signing officer
By adding employer contacts to the account, you acknowledge that the contact has legal authority to act on behalf of the employer in matters relating to the OINP, including submitting job offers and applications for the approval of an employment position.

In the landing page, select the Employer Contact tile and click on “Add new contact”.

f you are using an immigration representative or lawyer, please do not add them here. Please review the steps required to appoint a representative.

Employer contact
Last name (required)
Enter the employer contact’s last name.

First name (required)
Enter the employer contact’s first name.

Middle name (optional)
Enter the employer contact’s middle name (if applicable).

Job title (required)
Enter the employer contact’s official job title.

Phone number (required)
Enter the employer contact’s professional phone number.

Email (required)
Enter the employer contact’s email address.

Click on “Add contact”. Only the authorized signing officer can edit or cancel the employer contact information.

The organization contact will receive emails containing PIN and enrolment numbers prompting them to register an account in the OINP e-Filing Portal to access the employer’s account.

To remove a contact, click on the “Remove contact” button at the top of the dashboard. This will prevent the contact from accessing their account in the OINP e-Filing Portal, including job offers or applications they have been assigned.

Add/remove an employer contact for each job offer
Click on the “Job Offer and Application dashboard” tile on the home page. Select a registered job offer in the table, then click on “Manage employer contact” at the top and select the employer contact’s name from the dropdown list to add the contact for this job offer.

If the signing officer creates the job offer and does not add an employer contact, their name will appear automatically. If they want to add a different employer contact, they must:

Go to the Job Offer and Application dashboard.
Select the job offer.
Click “Manage Employer Contact”.


Once the checkbox is unchecked, the signing officer can use the dropdown menu to select an employer contact and then click “Confirm” to proceed.



To remove the employer contact from the job offer, click 'Remove Employer Contact'. The signing officer will then act as both the signing officer and employer contact for the job offer.

Add additional signing officers to an employer's account
Employers can choose to add up to two additional signing officers to the employer’s account by following these steps:

The original signing officer must add the individuals as employer contacts by following the steps above.
Each individual must complete their account registration using the PIN and enrolment numbers provided.
Once registration is complete, the signing officer can promote them to employer contact.
To promote an employer contact, the signing officer must:

Navigate to the Employer Contacts tile.
Select the employer contact.
Click on “Promote to Signing Officer”.


If the newly-promoted signing officer was assigned as an employer contact on any job offers, a prompt will offer to replace them as an employer contact. Select “No one” if the signing officer should remain the employer contact for the job offer, or else select another contact from the drop-down menu.
Click “confirm” to complete the promotion.
Only employer contacts who have registered in the portal using their PIN and enrolment numbers will appear in the drop-down.



Once promoted, the new signing officer will be removed from all previously assigned job offers, as each job offer can only have one signing officer.

Step 6: Submit a job offer
To submit an application for the approval of an employment position, you must first provide information about the position. This is also known as submitting a job offer. This step is necessary even if the employee is already working in the position.

Once you have submitted a job offer, the employee will receive an email with the job offer ID and will be prompted to register an EOI.

To create a job offer, click “Job offer and Application dashboard” on the landing page, and then click “Create New Job Offer”.

Select your Ontario Workforce Priority stream option
Under the Ontario Workforce Priority stream, you can create job offers in any National Occupational Classification (NOC) under Training, Education, Experience and Responsibilities (TEER) category 0 to 5.

It is recommended that you consult with the employee to ensure that you determine the most appropriate option. For more information, please review the Ontario Workforce Priority stream page.

Select the option, TEER 0-3 or TEER 4-5, that you wish to create a job offer under and provide the name, email address and job title of the employee. The option is based on the NOC occupation of the job offer.

Employee last name (required)
Enter the employee’s last name exactly as it appears on their government issued ID. If the employee does not have a first name or a last name as per their government-issued ID, please enter their single name in the last name field and N/A in the first name field.

If the employee already has a profile in the e-Filing Portal, the name you enter must match the name used in their profile.

If it does not match, the system will display an error. If that happens, check with your employee to confirm the name they registered with before proceeding.

Image
Screenshot of an employee information form showing fields for last name, first name, middle name, and personal email address. A red error message indicates a mismatch between the entered name "John Doe" and the email "John.Doe@email.com."
Employee first name (required)
Enter the employee’s first name.

Employee middle name (optional)
Enter the employee’s middle name, if applicable.

Employee personal email address (required)
Enter the employee’s email address. This should be their personal or work email address. You cannot provide an email address created or controlled by a representative.

Job title (required)
Enter the employee’s job title.

Select the authorized signing officer for this job offer
If the employer contact is creating the job offer, they will be asked to use the drop-down menu to select the signing officer associated with the job offer.

If the signing officer is creating the job offer, their name will appear, and this field will be read-only.

Click on “Create Draft”, and you will be directed back to the Job Offer and Application dashboard. Please note that creating a draft is not the same as submitting the job offer. To complete and submit your job offer, select the Job ID and click on “Edit”.



Important: Once you have created the draft, you will not be able to make any changes to the TEER option or the employee’s information. If you made an error when selecting the option and/or the employee’s information, you can submit a new job offer under the correct option and/or with the correct employee information.

At this point, the signing officer may either choose to complete the job offer on their own or appoint a representative and/or an employer contact to complete it. To do so, please review the steps required to appoint a representative.

To add an employer contact to the job offer, please click on “Manage Employer Contact” and select the appropriate employer contact from the drop-down menu. Note that only employer contacts that were previously added to the account under the Employer contacts page will appear in the dropdown menu.

Only the authorized signing officer or employer contact person can create a job offer draft. If you appoint a representative to the job offer, they cannot edit the employee’s name, email address or job title fields. Once the job offer draft has been created, your representative may complete and submit the rest of the job offer.

Job offer information
In this section, you will be asked for the details of the job offer, including NOC, hourly wage and the business location where the employee will work or report to work.

Only the authorized signing officer or employer contact person can create a job offer draft. If you appoint a representative to the job offer, they cannot edit the employee’s name, email address or job title fields. Once the job offer draft has been created, your representative may complete and submit the rest of the job offer.

National Occupational Classification (NOC) Code (5 digits) (required)
Enter the NOC code of the employee’s job offer.

Hourly wage (required)
Enter the wage that the employee will be paid on an hourly basis.

If the employee will be a salaried employee, calculate the hourly wage by deducting any bonuses or other discretionary benefits by dividing the sum by the number of weeks of work per year and the number of hours of work per week.

The program does not consider remuneration by piece work, bonuses, commissions, vacation pay or non-financial compensation as part of an applicant’s offered wage. You may offer an employee piece work, bonuses, commissions or non-financial compensation in addition to base pay. However, these will not be considered part of the hourly base wage.

Is the position permanent and full time (required)
Confirm whether the job offer is for a full-time and permanent position:

Full-time means that the position must require, over the course of a 12-month period, no less than 1,560 hours of paid work per year and no less than 30 hours paid work per week. This includes periods of paid vacation.
Permanent means that the job must have no end date (also known as an indeterminate duration).
Business location where the employee will work or report to work (required)
Enter the address of the location where the employee will work or report to work.

In cases where the employee will work at more than one location, the location where the employee will ‘report to work’ means either:

the location where the employee’s immediate supervisor or manager works
the location of the administrative office where the employee will receive work assignments
Is this location in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA)? (required)
Confirm whether the employee’s work location is located in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA).

Employer contact
If the signing officer creates the job offer, and has not added an employer contact, the name of the signing officer will be prepopulated. If they wish to add an employer contact, the signing officer will need to go to the Job offer and Application Dashboard, select the radio button beside the applicable job offer and uncheck “Same as Employer Signing Officer”. Once unchecked, the signing officer can use the dropdown menu to select an employer contact that was previously added to the account.

If the signing officer created the job offer and previously added an employer contact to the job offer from the Job offer and Application dashboard, this section will be prepopulated. If an employer contact has created the job offer draft, their name will be prepopulated here.

Important: You cannot make any changes to your employer contact on this page. If you wish to add, remove, or update the employer contact, this must be done in the Job offer and Application dashboard.

Assistance with employer application
If you have already appointed an immigration representative or lawyer to this job offer, this section will be prepopulated.

Important: You cannot make any changes to your representative on this page. If you wish to appoint, cancel, or change your representative, this must be done in the Job offer and Application dashboard.

Declaration and submission
Carefully review and complete the declaration.

Click “Submit job offer” to complete and submit the job offer.

After you submit a job offer
Once you have successfully created a job offer, the employee will receive an email with a Job Offer ID. The employee may then use the Job Offer ID to register their EOI.

You cannot make changes to the job offer once you have submitted it. If you need to make changes, you will be required to withdraw the job offer and create a new one. If the employee has already registered an EOI, it will also be withdrawn, and they will need to register a new one using the new Job Offer ID.

The Job Offer ID will remain valid for up to 30 days for the employee to register their EOI. If they do not register their EOI within 30 days, the Job Offer ID will expire, and the job offer will be withdrawn. You will need to create a new job offer for the employee to register their EOI.

The job offer will be automatically withdrawn if the associated EOI expires. Expressions of interest are valid for up to 12 months. If the employee has not received an invitation to apply within this period, both the EOI and the job offer will be automatically withdrawn. If you and the employee are still interested in applying to the program after the expiration of the EOI, you must create a new job offer and they must register a new EOI.

If the employee has been issued an invitation to apply, you will be notified via email and the “status” column of the Job offer and Application dashboard will be updated.

Step 7: Submit an application for approval of an employment position
If the OINP selects the employee’s EOI, both the employer and the employee will be notified via email. Once the employer has been notified that the employee has received an invitation to apply, the employer may submit an application for approval of an employment position in the Employer Portal. You don’t need to complete your application all at once. You can save your application and return to it, as long as you submit it within 14 calendar days from the date of the invitation to apply.

If you do not apply within 14 days, the application will be withdrawn, and you will need to create a new job offer to be considered for future invitations to apply.

To complete the application, access the Job offer and Application dashboard, select the job offer and click on “Edit” at the top of the dashboard.



Employer information
The fields on this page are prepopulated based on the employer information you provided when you registered your business. You cannot edit this information in the portal. To request an update to this information, please submit a webform to the program.

Employer authorized signing officer information
The fields on this page are prepopulated based on the employer authorized signing officer information provided during employer account registration in the Employer Portal.

Important: You cannot make any changes to the signing officer on this page. If you wish to change the signing officer this must be done in the Job Offer and Application dashboard.

Note that updates to the signing officer will only be reflected in the Job Offer and Application dashboard. The employer authorized signing officer information' page will continue to display the information of the signing officer who registered the business in the Employer Portal.

Employer contact
This section will be prepopulated based on the employer contact selected in the job offer. 

Important: You cannot make any changes to your employer contact on this page. If you wish to remove or change an employer contact, this must be done in the Job Offer and Application dashboard.

Assistance with employer application
If you have already appointed an immigration representative or lawyer to this application, this section will be prepopulated.

If you have not appointed a representative to this application, this section will be blank.

Important: You cannot make any changes to your representative on this page. If you wish to appoint, cancel or change your representative, this must be done in the Job Offer and Application dashboard.

Job offer stream
The fields on this page are prepopulated based on the information you provided in the job offer. You cannot edit this information in the application.

Employer revenue legal structure information
If you previously completed the Employer Profile, the fields on this page will be prepopulated. You can edit these fields if you need to update the revenue or legal structure information of your business. If you have not previously completed the Employer Profile, these fields will be blank, and you must complete them to proceed to the next page. Please see Step 4 for further information about these fields.

Business details and compliance
If you previously completed the Employer Profile, the fields on this page will be prepopulated. You can edit these fields if you need to update the information. If you have not previously completed the Employer Profile, these fields will be blank, and you must complete them to proceed to the next page. Please see Step 4 for further information about these fields.

Job offer information
The employee’s NOC and hourly wage are prepopulated from the job offer. The NOC cannot be changed; however, the hourly wage may be updated to reflect the employee’s current wage if they received a wage increase since the job offer was initially submitted.

Is the position permanent and full-time? (required)
This information is prepopulated based on the information you provided in the job offer. You cannot edit this information in the application.

Business location where the employee will work or report to work (required)
This information is prepopulated based on the information you provided in the job offer. You cannot edit this information in the application.

Is this location in the Greater Toronto Area (GTA)? (required)
This information is prepopulated based on the information you provided in the job offer. You cannot edit this information in the application.

Is the wage subject to a collective agreement (required)
Confirm whether the wage is subject to a collective agreement.

The low or median wage level requirements do not apply if the job offer is for a position whose pay is governed by a collective agreement.

Weeks of work per calendar year (required)
Provide the number of weeks the employee will work over a one-year period. Do not deduct paid vacation from the number of weeks.

If you select Other, you will be asked to specify why the job offer is less than 52 weeks per year.

Hours of work per week (required)
Provide the number of hours the employee will work per week.

Number of full-time employees who are Canadian citizens or permanent residents who work or report to work at this location. Do not include the employee who is applying for the certificate of nomination. (required)
Provide the number of full-time employees who are Canadian citizens or permanent residents who work at this location. Do not include your temporary foreign workers or part-time employees.

Is the employee currently working for the business? (required)
Confirm whether the employee:

currently works for the business in the same position of the job offer
currently works for the business in a different position than the job offer
does not currently work for the business
If the employee currently works for the business in the job offer position, confirm their:

start date (required)
current hourly wage (required)
current hours of work per week (required)
current weeks of work per year (required)
If the employee does not currently work for the business, please specify.

List all the main duties and responsibilities of the position offered to the employee (required)
Provide a list of all the main duties and responsibilities that the employee will be expected to perform in the job offer position.

Explain why the position is urgently necessary to your business
Include in your explanation how the position aligns with your existing business activities and why it is required to be filled on a priority basis in order to maintain or grow your business. (required)

If the selected NOC is 73300 — Transport truck drivers, you must also confirm:

minimum number of hours the employee will be expected to drive in a typical work week (as a full-time employee)
average number of hours that the employee will be expected to drive in a typical work week (as a full-time employee)
minimum number of miles/kilometers the employee will be required to drive per week
minimum number of hours the employee will be required to work per week
maximum number of hours the employee will be required to work per week
If you are seeking approval under NOC 73300 — Transport truck drivers or NOC 73301 — Bus drivers, subway operators and other transit operators, codes, you must also demonstrate that your business has a valid CVOR certificate, as defined in subsection 1(1) of the Highway Traffic Act, and a safety rating under that Act of Excellent, or Satisfactory.

Regulated profession
Does this position being offered to the employee require a licence, registration or other authorization in order for the employee to work in Ontario? (required)
Confirm whether the position being offered to the employee requires a license, registration or other authorization for the employee to work in Ontario.

Does the employee meet the necessary certification, licensing or registration required for the regulated profession in Ontario? (required)
Confirm if the employee meets the necessary Ontario or federal certification, licensing or authorization.

If the job offer is for an occupation that requires a mandatory licence or other authorization under Ontario or federal law, the employee must hold a valid licence or authorization from the appropriate federal or Ontario regulatory body.

If you select no for the follow-up question indicating that the employee does not meet the necessary certification, licensing or registration required for the regulated profession in Ontario, you will be asked to explain how the applicant is legally entitled to work in the position.

Equity
Confirm whether the employee or their family hold or have held equity in the business. If they do, you will be asked to confirm the total percentage of equity held by the employee and their family.

The employee or any member of their family may only hold or have held equity in your business, either directly or indirectly, if the equity is/was less than 10% and only if it was obtained as part of the remuneration package as an employee. The combined total amount of equity held by the employee, or any of their family members, must be less than 10%.

A family member includes the employee’s spouse, common-law partner and children under the age of 22, including their children.

Labour Market Impact Assessment
A Labour Market Impact Assessment (LMIA) is a document that you may be required to obtain from Employment and Social Development Canada before hiring a foreign worker. A positive LMIA shows that there is a need for a foreign worker to fill the job.

You are not required to have a positive LMIA to apply to the OINP. However, if you do not have an LMIA for the exact position of the job offer, you will be required to demonstrate that you undertook reasonable recruitment efforts to fill the position with a Canadian citizen or permanent resident prior to offering the job to the employee if they are applying under the Ontario Workforce Priority stream.

Has the business applied for a Labour Market Impact Assessment (LMIA) from Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) for the position being offered to the applicant? (required)
Confirm whether the business applied for an LMIA for the position being offered to the employee.

Has the business received a positive LMIA from Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) for the position being offered to the applicant? (required)
Confirm whether the business has received a positive LMIA for the position being offered to the employee. If yes, you will be asked to input the date of the LMIA approval.

Employee status (if applicable)
You only need to complete this section if you are applying under the Ontario Workforce Priority stream and you did not receive a positive LMIA from ESDC for the position being offered to the applicant.

You only need to complete this section if you are applying under the Ontario Workforce Priority stream and you did not receive a positive LMIA from ESDC for the position being offered to the applicant.

Confirm the current status of the employee.

An individual who is authorized to work in Ontario would have legal immigration status such as a valid temporary work permit allowing them to work in Ontario.

Recruitment summary (if applicable)
You only need to complete this section if the employee is an individual currently living abroad, is visiting Canada or is working in a province or territory other than Ontario.

You may use recruitment agencies, headhunters or HR consulting firms to conduct recruitment on your behalf. You may not employ an immigration representative to assist you with your recruitment.

If this section is applicable to you, you will be asked to provide a summary of your efforts to fill the position within the local labour market before offering the position to the employee. This includes:

number of individuals that applied for the position being offered to the employee
number of days the business formally advertised and recruited to fill the position being offered to the employee
a description of job advertising and recruitment efforts, including:
the type and location of the job advertisement
the advertising timeframe
the content of the advertisement
a summary of interviews
a summary of results
an explanation as to why your recruitment efforts were unsuccessful in hiring a Canadian citizen or permanent resident for the position being offered to the employee applicant
Required documents
Scan and upload all your supporting documents. Please visit the Ontario Workforce Priority Stream: Employer Checklist for further details.

Make sure all your supporting documents are clear and legible. We will not accept documents that are blurry or illegible.

Your supporting documents must be uploaded using one of the accepted document formats:

.doc
.docx
.xls
.xlsx
.ppt
.pptx
.pdf
.rtf
.txt
.jpeg
.bmp
.png
.gif
.tiff
File size limits
In most cases, the maximum file size is 10 MB per document.

Scan your documents at a lower resolution to reduce the size of your documents and allow for a faster upload.

All pages of a specific document should be uploaded into one file (if the size limit permits).

Representative’s declaration (if applicable)
This section is only applicable if a representative has been appointed in connection with the application. It can only be completed by the representative via their representative profile.

The representative should complete this section after the employer has finalized all previous sections of the application, as doing so will lock the application from further edits by the employer. Once the representative’s declaration is completed, only you, the employer, will be able to review the application.

The representative’s declaration must be uploaded first, before your declaration can be uploaded by the authorized signing officer. The authorized signing officer can then submit the employer application.

To complete the representative’s declaration, the representative must:

Click the “Print declaration” button. Print a hard copy, review it carefully and complete it in ink.
Confirm that they have reviewed the entire application, including the latest modifications, by checking the checkbox.
Upload the completed and signed declaration by clicking the “Upload the signed declaration” button.


If the employer needs to make further edits after the representative completed their declaration, the representative must click on the “Unlock the application” button, review any modifications made by the employer and re-upload their signed declaration.



Employer’s declaration by authorized signing officer
This section is only visible to the signing officer and employer contact and cannot be completed by the representative. If the employer has added a representative to the application, this section can only be completed after the representative has uploaded their declaration.

To complete the declaration and submit the application, the signing officer must:

Click on the “Print Consent Form” button. Print a hard copy of the form, carefully review it and complete it in ink.
Upload the completed and signed Consent Form by clicking on the “Upload signed Consent Form” button.
Once the signed Consent Form is uploaded, the “Sign and Submit” button will become active. A pop-up will appear once you click on this button notifying you that this is the last step in submitting the application.
To proceed with the final submission, click on the “Submit Application” button.


Please ensure that the Employer’s Declaration is signed in ink by the designated signing officer linked to the application. The authorized signing officer linked to the application is listed in the Job Offer and Application dashboard under the Signing Officer column. No other individual, including an employer contact, is authorized to sign the declaration on behalf of the authorized signing officer linked to the application.

After you submit your application
Once you submit the application, there will not be any opportunity to update the submitted application via the Employer Portal. Should you wish to make any updates to the application, you must contact the program via the webform. You will receive an email confirming that your application has been received. The status of the job offer in the Job Offer and Application dashboard will be updated to ‘Application Submitted’.

The employee will receive an email notifying them that you have submitted your application. They may then make the payment and submit their application.

When the OINP assesses your application, we may request additional supporting documents from you to validate information included in your application. For more information, please refer to the Employer Checklist.

Navigating the Job Offer and Application Dashboard
In this dashboard, the signing officer can review all job offers and applications created by the employer.

Note that employer contacts will only be able to view job offers that they have created or been added to.

From the dashboard, employers can:

create a new job offer
check the status of a job offer or application
edit a draft job offer that they haven’t submitted
review submitted job offers and applications
submit an application for approval of an employment position
withdraw a job offer
appoint or cancel an authorized representative to a job offer
add or remove an employer contact to a job offer
update the signing officer associated with a job offer
respond to a document request or review correspondence issued by the OINP
Create a new job offer
To create a new job offer, click “Create New Job Offer” at the top of the page and follow Step 6: Submit a job offer.

Check the status of a job offer or application
You can check the status of each job offer and application you have submitted under the “Status” column.

The status column will update once:

you create a draft job offer
you submit a job offer
the employee registers their EOI
the employee receives an invitation to apply
you submit an application for the approval of an employment position
You can also click on “Show More” under the Job ID to see the job offer submission, invitation to apply and application submission dates.

Edit a draft offer that you have not submitted
Once you have created a draft job offer, you may proceed to edit and submit a completed job offer.

Only one user can edit a draft job offer at a time. If another user must view the job offer simultaneously, they must select the “Read Only” button. To make edits later, the first user must exit the draft. If the record is locked for editing, the first user can select the “Unlock” button to allow another user to begin editing.



Please note that you cannot make changes to completed job offers after they have been submitted. If you need to make changes, you will be required to withdraw the job offer and create a new one. If the employee has registered an EOI based on the job offer, their EOI will be withdrawn, and they will need to register a new one.

Review submitted job offers and applications
Once you have submitted a job offer or application, you cannot update any of the fields. By clicking “Open”, you can only review completed job offers or applications.

Submit an application for approval of an employment position
Once you receive an email that the employee's EOI has been selected, you may submit an application for approval of an employment position.

This invitation to apply will change your job offer status to “ITA Issued”. To begin the application, click “Edit”.

Only one user can edit an application at a time. If another user needs to view the application simultaneously, they must select the “Read Only” button. To make edits later, the first user must exit the application. If the record is locked for editing, the first user can select the “Unlock” button to allow another user to begin editing.



Withdraw a job offer
You can withdraw a job offer at any time by clicking “Withdraw”.

If you withdraw the job offer after the employee has registered their EOI, the employee will receive an email notifying them that their EOI was automatically withdrawn.

If you withdraw the job offer after you have submitted the application for the approval of an employment position, the employee will receive an email notifying them that their application was withdrawn.

For the employee to be placed in the EOI selection pool again, you will need to register a new job offer, and the employee will need to register a new EOI.

Appoint or cancel an authorized representative
Once you have created a draft job offer, you can click on “Add Representative” and follow the steps under Appointing a representative.

Note that only the signing officer or employer contact can create a job offer draft. If you appoint a representative to the job offer, they cannot edit the employee’s name, email address or job title fields. Once the job offer draft has been created, a representative may complete and submit the rest of the job offer.

You can appoint, change or cancel a representative at any time under each job offer. If you wish to cancel your representative, click on “Remove representative” under your representative’s name for each applicable job offer or application.

Add or remove an employer contact to a job offer
Select a registered job offer in the table, then click “Manage employer contact” at the top and select the employer contact’s name from the dropdown list to add the contact for this job offer.

To remove the employer contact from the job offer, click ‘Remove Employer Contact’. The signing officer will then act as both the signing officer and employer contact for the job offer.

Update the signing officer associated with a job offer
Select a registered job offer in the table, then click ‘Change Signing Officer’ and use the dropdown menu to select a new signing officer.

To select a new signing officer, the original signing officer must first promote an organization contact to the signing officer role. Please see Step 5 to learn how to do this.

Respond to a document request or review correspondence issued by the OINP
When the OINP issues correspondence, all authorized employer users (signing officer, employer contact and employer representative), as well as the employee and their representative (if applicable), will receive an email notification. Authorized employer users can view and respond to requests under the Document Request/Confirmation column in the Job Offer and Application Dashboard. Note that only employer users can respond to a document request, the employee and their representative (if applicable) are copied on the email notification as a courtesy only.

Respond to a document request (red alert icon)
Review the correspondence attached to the email.
Log in to the OINP Employer Portal.
Navigate to the Job Offer and Application Dashboard and locate the relevant application.
Click the red alert icon beside the application.
Click Show More to view details.
Use the Upload button to add the required document(s).
Click Submit to finalize your response.
Submitting closes the request, and no additional documents can be uploaded afterward. Ensure all requested documents are included before submitting. Note: In addition to the signing officer, an employer contact or authorized employer representative linked to the application may also respond through their profile.

Once submitted, the system will display the email address of the individual who completed the submission.

Review correspondence (green alert icon)
Review the correspondence attached to the email (if applicable).
Log in to the OINP Employer Portal.
Navigate to the Job Offer and Application Dashboard and locate the relevant application.
Click the green alert icon beside the application to view the message.
Appointing a representative
You can submit an application on your own, or you can authorize an immigration representative or lawyer to assist you. You may choose to appoint an authorized representative, such as an immigration consultant or lawyer, to provide advice or help with the application process and to act on your behalf with the OINP.

Your authorized representative does not need to be the same as the employee’s representative.

Who can be a representative
By law only certain professionals may act as paid representatives. Authorized representatives are regulated under the Ontario Immigration Act, 2015 and must be:

a person who is authorized under the Law Society Act, which includes:
a lawyer who is a member in good standing of the Law Society of Ontario
a lawyer who is a member in good standing of another Canadian provincial or territorial law society and who is authorized to practice law in Ontario
a member in good standing of the College of Immigration and Citizenship Consultants
any other individual prescribed by the minister (none at present)
An authorized representative is an individual who represents, provides assistance, or advises you in connection with your application. No one else is legally allowed to charge you or receive any other type of payment to be your representative. Learn more about who can be a representative.

How to authorize a representative
If you wish to authorize a representative, you must add them under each individual job offer. Please do not add your representative as your employer contact.

To add a representative to assist you with submitting a job offer or application:

Ensure that the representative is registered with the OINP.
Create a job offer draft.
In the Job offer and Application dashboard, click on the radio button beside the relevant job offer and select “Add Representative”.
Enter the representative’s first name, last name and email and click “Search”.
If the representative has registered with the OINP, their contact information will appear. Please confirm this information and click “Appoint”.
Once you have appointed a representative, they will receive an email with the job ID.

To authorize a representative to assist you after you have submitted a job offer:

Navigate to the job offer and application dashboard.
In the Job offer and Application dashboard, click on the radio button beside the relevant job offer and select “Add Representative”.
Enter the representative’s first name, last name and email and click “Search”.
If the representative has registered with the OINP, their contact information will appear. Please confirm this information and click “Appoint”.
If the employee receives an invitation to apply and you have authorized a representative for the job offer, your representative can assist you with completing the application for approval of an employment position.

Your representative cannot:

register your business in the Employer Portal
add or remove an employer contact
edit the Employer Profile
create a job offer draft:
only the authorized signing officer or employer contact can create a job offer draft
once the job offer draft has been created, your representative may complete and submit the rest of the job offer
sign and submit your application for the approval of an employment position
only the authorized signing officer can sign the Consent Form and submit an application
How to cancel a representative
You may change or cancel the authorized representative associated with a job offer at any time, and they will no longer be authorized to access information pertaining to the job offer.

To cancel your representative:

Navigate to the Job Offer and Application dashboard.
Click on the radio button beside the relevant job offer(s) and click on “Remove Representative”.
A pop-up will appear asking you to confirm whether you would like to cancel the representative’s authorization, click “Yes”.
Updating business details provided during registration
You cannot update the information you provided during registration directly through the Employer Portal.

How to request changes
To request changes, submit a webform and select “I am an employer, and I have a question about the Employer Portal” under Inquiry Type.

The authorized signing officer or employer contact must submit all requests. You must include an explanation with your request. Some updates require additional supporting documentation.

CRA number
Provide documentation showing the amalgamation or purchase of the business, such as:

a purchase agreement
a certificate of amalgamation
Business address
Provide one of the following:

a copy of the deed or ownership document for the new business premises
a copy of the lease, offer to lease, license or notice of license registered on title, showing you lease the property
Legal name of employer
Provide documentation supporting the name change, such as:

a certificate of registration
articles of incorporation
purchase agreement
Operating name
Provide documentation confirming the change, such as:

certificate of registration
articles of incorporation
purchase agreement
Disclaimer
The OINP is governed by the Ontario Immigration Act, 2015 (Act) and its regulations. In the event of any inconsistency between the Act and its regulations and this page, the Act and its regulations take precedence.

Contact us
Ask us a question via webform or by phone from Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. at:

Tel: 416-327-0374
Toll-free: 1-866-214-6820  (toll-free within North America only)
