Overseas Processing
Application submissions
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

On this page
Language of application forms and letters
What is a complete application
Where to submit an application
Acknowledgment of receipt of the application
Language of application forms and letters
Application forms must be in English or French. Application forms in other languages will not be recognized as official application forms. Other form letters may be in languages other than English or French. Refusal letters for all types of applications must be in English or French.

What is a complete application
An application is complete when it meets the requirements of section 10 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) and includes evidence that the relevant fees have been paid:

All the questions on the application form are answered.
Proof of payment has been submitted.
All required forms are signed.
All documents have been submitted.
An incomplete application will not be accepted for processing.

Where to submit an application
Section 11 of the IRPR specifies where applicants should submit their applications for permanent or temporary resident visas. The intent is for applications to be directed to the processing office best informed to assess them, thereby improving program integrity and security.

All programs have an application package and guide that tells applicants how and where to send their application. If an application is not made by electronic means, it must be submitted to the address specified by the Minister, including the address specified on the Department’s website for that purpose.

While the IRPR defines where an application must be submitted, they do not stipulate where an application must be processed. To protect program integrity, applications are processed at offices with the appropriate expertise and knowledge.

Information regarding the location of visa offices outside Canada can be found here.

Acknowledgment of receipt of the application
Applicants for permanent residence, or their representative (if applicable), will receive an acknowledgement of receipt of application (AoR) letter by email if they have provided a valid email address. The purpose of the AoR is to confirm that an application has met the requirements to be accepted into processing. The AoR will include the following:

the applicant’s file number
the approximate time within which the application should be completed based on the category of application
other information concerning additional or missing documentation.

Applications for permanent residence from diplomatic, consular and official personnel
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

Individuals who are accredited foreign representatives to Canada (for example, diplomatic, consular or official personnel) and their accredited family members can’t become permanent residents while they are still accredited.

Their privileges and accredited status must have ended before they may be issued a visa or confirmation of permanent residence.

The following guidance applies to officers who are processing applications for permanent residence from foreign nationals who are, or who the officer thinks may be, accredited foreign representatives to Canada as per paragraph 190(2)(a) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) or accredited family members of foreign representatives to Canada. Officers should not finalize the applications or issue visas until they are satisfied, based on documentary evidence, that the applicants are no longer accredited.

Officers must notify Global Affairs Canada’s (GAC’s) Office of Protocol (XDC) twice:

once an application has been received to notify GAC’s XDC that the foreign national has made an application for permanent residence, and request that XDC verify the accreditation of the applicant(s) and confirm whether their accredited status has ended
before finalization and include the applicant’s name and position, and the name of the foreign mission or international organization, and provide proof that the accreditation has ended (if the applicant is in a position to provide this) or a statement that the assignment has ended (or will end, if this is prospective)
Note: The instructions for ending privileges and accredited status prior to being issued a visa or confirmation of permanent residence only apply to persons who were accredited by GAC’s XDC. They don’t apply to persons who are (or were) accredited (that is, who enjoy diplomatic, consular or official status) in another country.

Extending the validity of visas
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

The validity of a permanent resident visa (PRV) may not be extended, and replacement visas cannot be issued with a new validity date. If a foreign national does not use their visa, they must make a new application for a PRV.

They must also pay a new application processing fee. If they have paid a right of permanent residence fee (RPRF), they do not need to pay it again. The RPRF can only be collected once.

Sometimes, due to factors beyond their control, applicants receive visas that are valid for less than 2 months. If they cannot travel to Canada before their visa expires, officers should update whichever requirement (for example, a medical exam) was used to set the visa validity date. When a new validity date has been obtained, a new visa will be issued.

Responding to requests for information under the Access to Information Act and Privacy Act
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

On this page
Members of Parliament
Time frame for responses to parliamentarians
Exempt information
Responding to requests for information: Access to Information Act
Under the Privacy Act, Canadian citizens, permanent residents and all other persons present in Canada have a right to access their personal information held by a government institution.

The purpose of the Privacy Act is to protect the privacy of individuals with respect to personal information about themselves held by a government institution and to provide individuals with the right to access that information. A privacy request must be completed within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt. However, this time limit can be extended for limited and specific reasons as defined in the Privacy Act. There are no fees pursuant to the Privacy Act.

Requests for personal information submitted pursuant to the Privacy Act should contain enough information for the officer to locate the requested information.

This normally includes

full name (including any aliases)
date of birth
immigration or visa file number
unique client identifier (UCI) number
The request should also indicate specifically the information being sought by the client (that is, visa file, immigration file, medical file, citizenship file). Written consent to disclose information is required from the requestor and any persons who may have information on the file. At IRCC, consent allows the release of information to persons 16 years of age and older.

Clients may authorize the release of personal information to a representative. The representative must be a Canadian citizen, a permanent resident or an individual present in Canada. Before releasing personal information, officers should confirm the identity of the requesters, as well as the authorization to release personal information to them. Personal information includes any information on or about a client of the department that is recorded in any form. It also includes confirmation of the existence of a client’s file or record.

Information should not be released outside the official correspondence related to the application. For example, if the client requests a copy of the officers’ notes after the refusal, they must submit an access to information and privacy (ATIP) request for those records.

Officers may disclose personal information by fax, email or telephone, subject to security guidelines. Officers should ensure they are disclosing information to the person authorized to receive that personal information.

Members of Parliament
Paragraph 8(2)(g) of the Privacy Act permits a government institution to disclose personal information “to a Member of Parliament (MP) for the purpose of assisting the individual to whom the information relates in resolving a problem” without the written consent of the individual. As such, IRCC offices are authorized to respond to MPs about an individual’s application.

MPs are sitting members of the House of Commons or Senate. This discretionary privilege is not granted to provincial Members of Legislative Assemblies (MLAs), Members of the National Assembly (MNAs) in Quebec and Members of Provincial Parliaments (MPPs).

MPs usually delegate constituency business to constituency assistants. These assistants request personal information on behalf of MPs. Officers may release personal information to constituency assistants provided it is clear that MPs have designated them for this purpose. As with written requests, email requests for personal information on the letterhead of an MP or from the MP’s email address, signed by constituency assistants, do not pose a problem. The written reply will simply be addressed to the MP and sent to their official email address. Replies should not be sent to a private email address.

To ensure the proper protection of private information, requests from MPs should normally be handled in writing. However, officers may release personal information to constituency assistants over the telephone if MPs have designated them for this purpose. In these cases, to ensure proper identification and compliance with the Privacy Act, assistants should submit their requests for information in writing, by email or by fax requesting that the officer call them. This will ensure that the officer can confirm the identity of the assistant when returning the call.

When an MP has resigned or passed away, their seat becomes vacant, awaiting a by-election. In this case, the constituency office is kept open and the party whip is responsible for services to constituents until a by-election has been held. Officers can answer requests from the constituency office since the whip (an MP) is responsible for the office’s staff.

In the case of an independent MP or following a contested election, the Speaker of the House of Commons becomes responsible for services to constituents until a new MP is elected. Officers can answer requests in these cases as well. When Parliament is dissolved, personal information about other individuals cannot be given to MPs unless authorized by the Minister. The Minister will make a decision regarding the release of information when each Parliament approaches the end of its allotted time and dissolution appears imminent. Appropriate directions will be issued to officers as necessary. While the Privacy Act allows departments to disclose personal information to MPs to help resolve a constituent’s problem, MPs have no special access rights to other individuals’ records.

Officers are not to enter into policy discussions, program design or broad operational topics in letters to MPs. Subjects such as anti-fraud practices, processing priorities or quality assurance should not be discussed in a letter. It is the Minister who is accountable to Parliament for such matters. Consequently, officers should suggest to MPs asking questions related to policy or general procedures to submit them to the Minister’s office. In brief, information given to MPs by officers should be related only to a specific application.

Time frame for responses to parliamentarians
The standard for replies to MP enquiries is one week (or 5 working days). Where a substantive reply within one week is not possible, the MP’s office should be advised within one week of receipt of the enquiry that a reply will be provided shortly and by a specific date. Such delays should be exceptional and short. Ideally, MPs should receive a response within 2 working days.

Migration program managers are responsible for either preparing replies to MPs personally or closely and regularly monitoring replies sent by their office for both quality and timeliness. Migration offices must reply to all MP requests.

Exempt information
Only the Access to Information and Privacy (ATIP) Division has the authority to exempt from release information requested under the Privacy Act or the Access to Information Act. The exempted information may make up the entire record or just a portion of it. If IRCC or the migration office believes that certain information should not be released, it should provide a copy of the information along with an explanation as to why it should be exempt from release to the ATIP Division.

Responding to requests for information: Access to Information Act
Under the Access to Information Act, Canadian citizens, permanent residents and all other individuals or corporations present in Canada have a right of access to any information held by a government institution, regardless of its source, subject to exclusions and exemptions as described in the Access to Information Act. Whereas the Privacy Act is limited to providing access to personal information only, requests under the Access to Information Act may be about anything, including records on non-case files.

Clients who are outside Canada, and who are not Canadian citizens or permanent residents, must have a representative in Canada submit a request on their behalf pursuant to the Access to Information Act. Appropriate authorizations to disclose information to the representative must be provided.

All requests under this Act must be submitted to the ATIP Division. Only senior officials at the ATIP Division have the delegated authority to release and exempt information pursuant to this Act. There is a CAN$5.00 application fee (payable by cheque or money order to the Receiver General for Canada). All requests for information pursuant to the Access to Information Act must be responded to within 30 days. However, this time limit can be extended for limited and specific reasons as defined in the Access to Information Act.

If an IRCC or migration office receives a request for information from ATIP Division, officers should respond immediately.

The records and the recommendations should be scanned and uploaded to the Global Case Management System (GCMS). The ATIP Division will only accept paper records in certain circumstances. Contact the ATIP Division to determine the best approach for paper records.

Response to inquiries (migration offices): Clients and representatives
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

The responsibility for responding to inquiries or representations varies depending on the issue. Listed below are the various categories of inquiries or representations, as well as the contact information for the individual or office responsible.

Categories of inquiries or representations and contact information for the individual or office responsible
Category of inquiry or representation	Contact
Individual case inquiries related to the decision or decision-making process	
Migration office email address

If there is no reply after 30 days, or if there is a disagreement with the reply, you may contact Case Management Branch (CMB) by email at case-review-im-enquiry@cic.gc.ca.

Local office procedures	
Migration office email address

If there is no reply after 30 days, you may contact a migration program manager via the migration office email address.

Quality of service complaints or situations involving possible professional misconduct or malfeasance	
Migration program manager by email

Email address format: firstname.lastname@international.gc.ca

Complaints from applicants related to biometric information collection and processing	
Migration program manager via the migration office email address

Note: This category is for complaints from applicants alleging that their biographical data was matched against the fingerprints of a different applicant (mistaken identity) or alleging that their fingerprints were erroneously matched against an existing record in the Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s databank (false positives).

For complaints about quality of service related to biometric collection, consult the section on quality of service complaints above.

For complaints about the biometric requirement or general biometric procedures, consult the section on general procedures below.

General procedures, procedural consistency between offices, operational policy, global processing times and levels	
Director, Strategic Planning and Delivery, International Network (IN)
Immigration Program Guidance Branch (IPGB)
Immigration (selection) policy	
Write to the appropriate director within the IPGB:

Family class: Director, Social Policy and Programs
Skilled workers, provincial nominees, students and temporary workers: Director, Economic Policy and Programs
Business class: Director, Business Immigration
Ministerial instructions and levels: Director, Horizontal Immigration Policy
Procedures for migration offices
At this time, all migration offices are equipped to receive enquiries via email, including case-specific enquiries. The protocol encourages migration offices to respond to emails via email, but allows migration program managers the flexibility to use operationally feasible and efficient channels for responding (whether this is email, fax, letter or other means) depending on the local environment and conditions.

The protocol requires that migration offices

receive client enquiries via email
respond to emails (acceptable responses include automated replies, standard responses and case-specific replies via email or other channels)
have a dedicated email enquiries mailbox and address
handle email enquiries in the same way as other enquiries (for example, have written consent to release personal information to third parties, ensure client is adequately “identified” before any personal information is released)
Email enquirers must therefore state

the enquirer’s full name
who they are (that is, the applicant, the applicant’s designated individual, the applicant’s authorized representative, Canadian Member of Parliament)
their email address
They must also provide, as a minimum, the applicant’s

given name
family name
date of birth
visa office file number
Migration offices must also

establish, publish and adhere to response times for email enquiries
have the client’s consent to communicate via email
respond to the client in the official language of the client’s choice
provide cautions to clients using email to protect their personal identifiers and to be aware that email is not a secure channel
protect the privacy of IRCC staff
provide IRCC identifiers in email replies (that is, office name and address)
provide clear instructions to clients on what address to use and what information to include with an enquiry
Enquiries and representation to migration offices should be sent to the generic migration office mailboxes. You may indicate that it is for the attention of migration program managers (“Attention of”). Enquiries or representation should be sent either by email or by fax/mail, not both.

Document retention/digitization and disposition
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

On this page
Principles guiding the retention and disposal of documents
Guidelines for the retention and disposal of documents
During processing
Following finalization
Digitizing versus scanning
Principles guiding the retention and disposal of documents
When deciding whether to retain or dispose of a document related to a permanent or temporary residence application, migration offices should consider:

whether the document is directly germane to any positive or negative decision made on the application;
whether the document may be essential as evidence in any administrative or judicial proceedings resulting from a refusal of the application;
whether GCMS notes are sufficiently well documented concerning the material so that it can be disposed of or returned to the applicant and
the need to ensure that applications are as thin as possible to ensure efficient space management at migration offices
Migration offices should review the documents that clients submit with their applications to ensure that only documents that are relevant to the processing of the application are included in the application package. Migration offices should look for administrative opportunities to dispose of unneeded documents. Where possible, decisions on retention or disposal of documents should be made only when an application is finalized.

Retention periods vary depending on application outcome. Consult the relevant retention and disposition schedules (available internally only) to determine the relevant retention period and/or contact IM-Operations for repatriation assistance.

Documentation such as permanent resident counterfoils, confirmation of permanent residence, temporary resident permits, Quebec Acceptance Certificates (CAQs) and Quebec Selection Certificates (CSQs) should not be retained on finalized files. Relevant details from these documents should be recorded in the Global Case Management System (GCMS).

Migration offices should digitize documents where possible. Digitized documentation on approved and refused files is only admissible if the documentation has been digitized in accordance with IRCC’s Digitization Framework. Original copies of documentation can only be disposed of if proper digitization procedures are followed. Please consult the Digitization Manual for IRCC (available internally only) for detailed requirements. If digitization procedures are not followed, the scanned documentation is inadmissible in court proceedings under section 31 of the Canada Evidence Act.

Library and Archives Canada requires that the paper file be retained where an applicant might have been involved in war crimes or crimes against humanity.

Guidelines for the retention and disposal of documents
During processing
Documents that support routine processing are not to be filed.

Examples of such documents include:

birth, marriage and education certificates
copies of passports in immigration files
curricula vitae, school acceptances, statements of net worth and letters of invitation in non-immigration files
The date of receipt and nature of contents, where applicable, are to be recorded in GCMS notes.

The officer’s record of information from returned or discarded documents must be sufficiently detailed to permit another officer to continue processing the application or to respond to representations. Officers must also ensure that GCMS notes record any relevant information that may be used in administrative or judicial proceedings should a refusal be appealed. After their receipt has been recorded, the documents are either discarded or, if they are originals, they are returned to the applicant.

Officers may keep contentious or questionable documents on file during processing. If officers rely on a document to refuse an application, they must digitize it and save it in GCMS.

Officers must retain all evidence of an applicant’s involvement in war crimes or crimes against humanity.

Following finalization
For those migration offices that have the capability, contents of files may be digitized, except for documents relating to an applicant’s involvement in war crimes or crimes against humanity. These documents are to be kept for 5 years and then forwarded to Library and Archives Canada. The IMM 0008E form may be digitized, except in the case of applications by persons involved in war crimes or crimes against humanity.

Where appropriate, digitizing of documents should immediately follow finalization.

Information management will contact them for details and provide the required support. Migration offices should be prepared to provide the number of files, types of files and status of files. Information management will provide guidance, including templates to be used to list files returning to Canada. Information management will also provide proper box sizes to use and instructions on how to organize files in those boxes.

Information management can provide guidance regarding digitization standards to help offices officially transform the file from physical to digital and ultimately destroy the paper copy. If the digitization standard has not been applied while the file was scanned, the physical file remains the original and must be kept to be managed throughout its lifecycle.

Digitizing versus scanning
Digitization is IRCC’s certified process by which a physical document of business value is transformed into a digital image. A digitized image mirrors the physical document’s reliability, integrity and authenticity. Therefore, if the document is required for legal purposes, it is admissible as evidence as the official document. Also, in following the digitization process, you are able to destroy the source document. If a document is scanned, you cannot destroy the source document.

Scanning is a non-certified process where the physical document is converted to a digital image. It is essentially just making a copy of the original. Creating a digital image by scanning is not permitted for transforming any IRCC documents of business value.

Reconsideration after refusal
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

Applicants or their representatives often submit information after a refusal and request that an officer reconsider the decision. If an office receives a request to reconsider a decision, an officer must consider the request and decide whether to exercise their discretion to reconsider the previous decision. The legal doctrine of functus officio does not automatically bar reconsideration of final decisions (MCI v. Kurukkal, 2010 FCA 230). However, reconsideration should only be done, where warranted, in exceptional cases. An applicant’s dissatisfaction or disagreement with the decision does not by itself qualify as an exceptional case. The onus is on the applicant to satisfy the officer that reconsideration is warranted.

Reconsideration requests should be returned to the original decision maker when possible. When not possible, the request should be sent to a decision maker who has the delegated authority to render a decision.

Officers making a decision on whether to reconsider should ensure that the following information is entered in Global Case Management System (GCMS) Notes:

the reconsideration request and the decision, and
the reasons for the reconsideration decision

Intercountry adoptions: General Overview
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

This section provides a general overview of intercountry adoptions and describes the options for adoptive parents to obtain permanent resident status or a grant of Citizenship for their adopted child.

On this page
Intercountry adoptions
The citizenship process
The immigration process
Children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) versus adopted children (FC9)
Intercountry adoptions
Intercountry (or international) adoption is a process in which a person or couple who habitually resides in one country becomes the legal parent of a child who habitually resides in another country. In most intercountry adoptions, both Canada and the country of origin are parties to the Hague Convention on Intercountry Adoption, which sets out a process for intercountry adoptions to ensure protections for the best interests of the child. Some intercountry adoptions, however, involve a country that is not a party to the Hague Convention.

An intercountry adoption involves two separate processes:

the adoption process; and
the immigration or citizenship process.
The provinces and territories are responsible for the adoption process in Canada, as they have exclusive constitutional responsibility over adoption and child welfare issues. This provincial or territorial jurisdiction is reflected in the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR), which requires that the Central Authority of the province and territory to which the child is destined provide a written statement, a letter or notice of agreement (LOA/NOA), that they approve the adoption as conforming to the Hague Convention, or in the case of international adoptions where the child’s country of origin is not a party to the Hague Convention, that they do not object to the adoption, a letter of no objection (LONO). A written statement to this effect is required in all cases where provincial or territorial jurisdiction applies. For detailed information on provincial notification letters, see: Intercountry adoptions: Provincial notification letters.

Refer to the Intercountry adoptions: The Hague Convention PDI for further details on the Hague Convention and its requirements.

In Canada, two streams are available for adoptive parents to obtain permanent status for their adopted child: the immigration process or the citizenship process. The federal government is responsible for the immigration or citizenship process of an adopted child or child to be adopted.

The citizenship process
The citizenship process allows adoptive parents who are Canadian citizens to apply directly for Canadian citizenship for their adopted child under the Citizenship Act. There are two parts to the citizenship application process:

Part 1 is an assessment of the adoptive parent’s eligibility to pass on Canadian citizenship;
Part 2 is an assessment of the adoption against the requirements of provisions that apply in the adoption context under section 5.1 of the Citizenship Act.
If the adoption meets the requirements of the Citizenship Act and part 1 and 2 of the application is approved, the adopted child is considered to be granted Canadian citizenship. The adopted person could lose their non-Canadian citizenship once they become a Canadian citizen, depending on the laws of that foreign country. It is important to note that the first generation limit to citizenship by descent applies to the adopted person’s children if these children are born outside Canada.

For additional information on citizenship by way of grant to persons adopted by a Canadian citizen, see Acquisition of citizenship PDIs.

The citizenship process for persons adopted by Canadian citizens is outlined in the manual CP 14: Citizenship Adoptions (PDF, 1.2 MB).

The immigration process
The immigration process allows an adoptive parent to sponsor their adopted child or child to be adopted for permanent residence in Canada. Adoptive parents who are Canadian citizens and who reside or intend to reside in Canada once the immigration process is completed, or permanent residents who reside in Canada can use the immigration process.

The immigration process may be used for a dependent child who was adopted when they were under the age of 18 R117(2), as well as 18 years of age or older R117(4), where the adoption has been finalized in the child’s country of habitual residence (FC9), or for children under 18 years of age who are to have the adoption finalized in Canada (FC6) R117(1)(g). In addition, if an adoption was finalized when the adoptive parents and the child were both habitually residing in the same country (which is not considered an intercountry adoption), and later apply to immigrate to Canada they could include their adopted child within their permanent residence application as a dependent child, or after becoming permanent residents, apply to sponsor their adopted child as a dependent child (FC3) R117(1)(b).

Both adopted and biological children are required to meet the definition and requirements of a dependent child under R2. Although adopted children (FC9) and dependent children (FC3) are separate categories for the purposes of the Global Case Management System (GCMS), adopted children are not a category of their own as per the Regulations and must first and foremost meet the definition of a dependent child under R2. Children under 18 years of age whose adoption will be finalized in Canada fall under a separate category of their own (FC6).

If the sponsorship application and application for permanent residence are approved, the child will be granted permanent resident status in Canada. By acquiring permanent resident status rather than Canadian citizenship, there is no risk (until and unless the adopted person does acquire Canadian citizenship) that the adopted person could lose their non-Canadian citizenship if that citizenship is from a country that does not recognize dual citizenship. If the adopted person acquires Canadian citizenship at a later date under section 5(1) or 5(2) of the Citizenship Act, the first-generation limit to citizenship by descent will not apply to the adopted person’s children if these children are born outside of Canada.

Adoptive parents should choose the process that best corresponds to their needs and situation.

Children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) versus adopted children (FC9)
For most intercountry adoption cases, the adoption is completed in the child’s country of origin and an adoption order is issued in that country. The application for permanent residence must be processed against the requirements of an adopted child, according to subsections R117(2) and (3), and coded under the “FC9” category in GCMS.

However, in some cases, the adoption is completed in Canada. Child to be adopted in Canada (FC6) cases must meet the regulatory requirements of paragraph R117(1)(g). This category can be used for all countries, regardless of whether they are party to the Hague Convention.

The spirit of the Hague Convention must also be respected in non-Hague Convention cases. As a result, the requirements involving the best interests of the child in subsection R117(3) must be considered for non-Hague Convention FC6 cases.

Note: For grant of citizenship applications for adopted persons the adoption must be completed, either overseas or in Canada, before citizenship status is granted.

Intercountry adoptions: The Hague Convention and Central Authorities
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

This section provides information about the Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (Hague Convention). It describes the differences between intercountry adoptions with countries that have signed the Hague Convention (i.e. Hague adoptions) and intercountry adoptions with countries that have not signed the Hague Convention (i.e. non-Hague adoptions). It also describes the roles and responsibilities of countries that have signed the Hague Convention and the roles and responsibilities of their Central Authorities.

On this page
The Hague Convention
Main responsibilities in Canada
Hague Convention adoptions
Non-Hague Convention adoptions
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
Main responsibilities for Hague Adoptions in Canada
Major differences in the immigration/citizenship process with non-Hague intercountry adoptions
Potential risks for intercountry adoptions (higher risks for non-Hague countries)
For more information
The Hague Convention
In December 1996, Canada became party to the Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (the Hague Convention).

The objectives of the Hague Convention are to:

establish safeguards to ensure that intercountry adoptions take place in the best interests of the child and with respect for their fundamental rights as recognised in international law;
establish a system of cooperation between countries that have signed the Hague Convention through designated Central Authorities, to ensure that those safeguards are respected, thus preventing the abduction, sale, or traffic of children; and
secure the recognition of adoptions made in accordance with the Hague Convention.
The Hague Convention requires the designation of a Central Authority (CA), which is the main mechanism for cooperation between countries that have signed the Hague Convention and lists the duties for the CAs of both the country of origin and the receiving country. It is the role of these CAs to determine whether the Hague Convention applies to a particular case.

The Hague Convention requires the country of origin to ensure that (list is not exhaustive):

the child is adoptable;
the possibilities for placement of the child in the country of origin have been given due consideration
intercountry adoption is in the child’s best interests;
the proper consents have been obtained (including, where required, the consent of the birth parent and/or of the child)
these consents have been given freely and expressed in writing, after being duly counselled and informed of the effects of their consent, in particular whether the adoption will terminate the legal parent-child relationship
the decision to consent to the adoption is not induced by payment or compensation of any kind
having regard to the age and degree of maturity of the child, that consideration has been given to the child’s wishes and opinions.
In addition, the Hague Convention requires the receiving country to ensure that:

the adoptive parents are eligible and suitable to adopt
the adoptive parents have been counselled as necessary
the competent authorities have decided that the child is allowed to enter and live permanently in the receiving country
The Hague Convention allows for the adoption to be completed in either the country of origin or the receiving country, depending on the laws of the countries, and allows for probationary periods where the child and prospective adoptive parents (PAPs) live together (either in the country of origin or receiving country) before the adoption is finalized.

The Hague Convention applies to intercountry adoptions of children under 18 years of age that create a permanent legal parent-child relationship between the child and the adoptive parent.

For the full text of the Hague Convention, refer to the Hague Conference on Private International Law.

Main responsibilities in Canada
In Canada, the constitutional responsibility for adoption and child welfare rests with the provinces and territories. Each province and territory has their own designated CA and individual legislation, regulations, and procedures regarding adoption.

The immigration or citizenship process for the adopted child falls under federal jurisdiction. IRCC is the competent authority responsible for deciding whether the child is allowed to enter and live permanently in Canada.

The Minister of Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) is also the designated Federal Central Authority (FCA) under the Hague Convention. This role is exercised by the Intercountry Adoption Services (IAS) unit within IRCC. The FCA’s primary role is to promote the Hague Convention in Canada (both within IRCC, across other Departments and with the provincial and territorial CAs), and facilitate communication and cooperation between provincial and territorial CAs and those of other countries that have signed the Hague Convention.

Immigration and citizenship decisions are separate from adoption decisions and have different decision-makers. However, immigration and citizenship legislation has been amended to support Canada’s obligations under the Hague Convention. These obligations are reflected in the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) and the Citizenship Act and its corresponding Regulations. In a Hague Convention case, an adoption may be finalized only after the CAs of both countries involved have verified the above information (list is not exhaustive).

Hague Convention adoptions
The Hague Convention applies to intercountry adoptions where the child and the prospective adoptive parent (PAP) Footnote* habitually reside in different countries that are each party to the Hague Convention. It applies to every adoption, including intra-family or in situations where the PAP has dual citizenship. The determining factor for whether an adoption should be treated as an intercountry adoption is always the habitual residence of the PAP and child and not their nationalities.

Non-Hague Convention adoptions
The Hague Conference on Private International Law recommends that countries that have signed the Hague Convention apply the safeguards of the Hague Convention, to the extent possible, to all adoptions, even to those where the Hague Convention does not technically apply (where either one or both countries have not signed the Hague Convention).

Therefore, Canada applies, as far as practicable, the Hague Convention safeguards to every intercountry adoption, regardless of the child’s country of origin. For the current list of countries and their status in regard to the Hague Convention, refer to the status table.

United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
Canada is also party to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). With respect to adoptions, article 21 of the CRC affirms that, “States Parties that recognize and/or permit the system of adoption shall ensure that the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration”.

The Hague Convention complements article 21 of the CRC by establishing legal and procedural safeguards to the broad principles and standards laid out in the CRC. Additionally, Canada’s commitments as a party to the CRC exist regardless of whether the child habitually resides in a country that has signed the Hague Convention.

As Canada is a signatory to both the Hague Convention and the CRC, IRCC legislation (IRPA, IRPR and the Citizenship Act) includes safeguards to ensure that the best interests of the child relative to the adoption have been assessed before granting permanent resident status or citizenship.

For more information on the best interests of the child, see Intercountry adoptions: Best interests of the child.

Main responsibilities for Hague Adoptions in Canada
The chart below outlines generally the important responsibilities and steps for both Canada and the country of origin, based on the articles outlined in the Hague Convention. Steps do not necessarily take place in order (e.g. #7 can take place before or after the adoption is finalized, depending on the requirements of the country of origin). Note that some of the responsibilities of the Central Authority (CA) can be delegated to a different authority or body.

Main responsibilities for Hague Adoptions in Canada
Authorities	Responsibilities
Provincial/territorial (P/T) CA (or delegated authority or body)	1. Assessment of the prospective adoptive parents (PAP), which includes home study, criminal check, and training. (Article 5 a) and b))
P/T CA (or delegated authority or body)	2. Transfer of PAP adoption file to country of origin, outlining the profile of the child the PAP have been approved to adopt. (Article 15 b) and 9 b))
Country of origin CA (or delegated authority or body)	3. Country of origin matches PAP with a child available for intercountry adoption and sends psycho-social report on the child to P/T CA. (Article 16)
P/T CA (or delegated authority or body)	4. Acceptance of the match by PAP and P/T Central Authority. (Article 17 a) and b))
Country of origin CA and P/T CA	5. Both Central Authorities agree that the adoption should proceed. (Article 17 c))
P/T CA	6. P/T CA issues a Letter/Notice of Agreement to the CA of the country of origin. (Article 17)
Role of IRCC—competent authority for immigration of the child	7. Reviews file and issues appropriate document pursuant to Article 17 d).
Country of origin CA	8. Country of origin issues an invitation to travel (when required by country of origin). (Article 18)
Country of origin CA	9. a) Child is placed with PAP, adoption is finalized in the country of origin.
b) To-be-adopted child is placed with the PAP —adoption to be finalized in Canada or in country of origin, sometimes after a probationary period. (Article 18 and Article 19)
Country of origin CA or competent authority or P/T CA	10. a) If adoption is finalized in the country of origin, the competent authority in the Country of origin prepares Certificate of Conformity. (Article 23)
b) If the adoption is finalized in Canada, the P/T competent authority prepares the Certificate of Conformity. (Article 23)
P/T CA	11. Post-adoption requirements, such as post-adoption reports, specified by the country of origin, if applicable. (Article 9)
Major differences in the immigration/citizenship process with non-Hague intercountry adoptions
The provincial/territorial CA would issue a Letter of No Objection (LONO) instead of the Letter (or notice) of Agreement issued for Hague adoptions.

There is no requirement to produce a Certificate of Conformity for non-Hague adoptions.

For more information on provincial notification letters, see Intercountry adoptions: Provincial notification letters PDI.

Potential risks for intercountry adoptions (higher risks for non-Hague countries)
Children could be unjustifiably placed for adoption abroad (subsidiarity principle not applied)
Fraudulent documents to expedite adoptions
Risks for illicit practices, including child trafficking
Risk that proper consents for adoption were not obtained, including informed consent of birth parents
For more information
Intercountry adoptions: The application process
Intercountry adoptions: General overview
Intercountry adoptions: Provincial notification letters
Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption
Adopt a child from abroad
Footnotes
Footnote *
Please note that for the purposes of this document, PAP may include 1 or 2 individuals.

Intercountry adoptions: Concepts and best practices
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

This section provides key concepts and best practices for intercountry adoptions.

On this page
Simple adoption
Full adoption
Adoptability of the child
Habitual residence
Best interests of the child
Consent
Relative adoptions
Guardianship and Kafala
Adult adoptions
Suspension or closure of intercountry adoptions by a province or territory
Countries that restrict intercountry adoptions
Humanitarian and compassionate considerations
Simple adoption
A simple adoption is one in which the legal parent-child relationship (i.e. legal parentage) that existed before the adoption is not terminated, but a new legal parental responsibility for the child is established for the adoptive parents. Canada does not recognize simple adoptions for immigration purposes, though simple adoptions are included under the scope of the Hague Convention on intercountry adoptions. Some countries of origin that permit simple adoptions under their legislation allow for the conversion of these adoptions to full adoptions in the receiving country. This is also permitted under the Hague Convention, given that the country of origin clearly grants their permission for this conversion, and that consent was given (by such persons, institutions and authorities deemed necessary) for a full adoption.

Full adoption
A full adoption is one in which the pre-existing legal parent-child relationship is terminated, and a new legal parent-child relationship between the child and their adoptive parents is established.Footnote1 A full adoption must terminate the previous legal relationship with the birth parents, but it is not necessary to terminate the factual relationship between a child and their birth parents.

Adoptability of the child
The adoptability of a child is determined according to the laws and procedures of the child’s country of habitual residence (i.e. the country of origin). It is the responsibility of the country of origin to establish whether the child is adoptable.

To establish the child’s adoptability, the country of origin is responsible for making clear the specific requirements, such as a determination of abandonment or evidence of permanency planning, that need to be satisfied before a child may be eligible for adoption. For example, in the case of abandonment or where a child is orphaned, attempts are made to identify whether the child can be placed with relatives before the child is deemed adoptable. In some countries, the child will not be adoptable until they reach a specific age. Note that not all children deemed adoptable under law are abandoned or orphaned. Children can also be eligible for adoption in cases where they have been taken from their parents under child welfare legislation, and in cases where they are voluntarily surrendered by their parents who are unable to care for them.Footnote2

Habitual residence
The Hague Convention covers intercountry adoptions where the child and the prospective adoptive parent (PAP)Footnote* habitually reside in different contracting countries that are parties to the Convention, regardless of whether the adoption is finalized in the country of origin (where the child habitually resides) or in the receiving country (where the PAP habitually resides). The Convention applies to all intercountry adoptions, including intra-family cases and situations where the PAP has dual citizenship; the determining factor is always the habitual residence of the PAP and not their citizenship or nationality.

It is the province or territory’s (P/T) Central Authority who is responsible for making the determination of habitual residence in the case of an intercountry adoption.

Cases where a domestic adoption is completed when the PAPs habitually reside in a different country than the child are not compliant with the Hague Convention, and in many cases lack the safeguards established by the Convention. These adoptions may lack the involvement of a P/T Central Authority and may be an attempt by the PAP to circumvent the legal requirements for an intercountry adoption in the P/T or State where they habitually reside. For more information on habitual residence and the Hague Convention, please see the Note on Habitual Residence and the Scope of the 1993 Hague Convention (PDF, 9.8 MB).

Best interests of the child
The determination of the best interest of the child is the responsibility of the country of origin and the P/T Central Authorities. The determination of the best interests of the child is based on weighing a number of factors set out in the Convention.

See the Intercountry adoptions: Best interests of the child PDI for further information on the best interests of the child.

Consent
Establishing that the proper consents have been obtained for the adoption is the responsibility of the country of origin and the P/T’s Central Authorities. Ordinarily, consent is obtained from the birth parent(s), or legal guardian of the child, after they have been properly counselled and duly informed of the effects of adoption. This allows the adoption authorities to ensure that the consent was given freely and not induced or improperly obtained by financial or other reward.

Consent of the birth parent(s) should not be given until after the birth of the child. This is to ensure that the birth parent(s) have not changed their mind about relinquishing the child for adoption after the child is born. Lastly, in some cases where the child is at an appropriate age and stage of development, the consent of the child may also be necessary.Footnote3

Relative adoptions
As a condition to sponsorship, even in cases where the adopted child is related to the adoptive parents through their birth family, the pre-existing legal parent-child relationship must be severed, as is required for any adoption as per R3(2) of the IRPR. While the birth parent is no longer a legal parent after the adoption has taken place, the other family members remain as the child’s legal family and may qualify as members of the family class (e.g. sibling of the adopted child).

In cases of intercountry adoption, the same process and legal requirements will apply. Applications for sponsorship under the family class require evidence of a genuine parent-child relationship between the adopted child and adoptive parent, in fact and in law. A home study may not be required for relative adoptions under the law in all provinces and territories.

In some cases, a relative adoption is completed in Canada through a provincial or territorial court, and the corresponding provincial or territorial Central Authority was not involved and issues a letter of no involvement (LONI). In these cases, the adoption order is sufficient evidence that the adoption was in accordance with the laws of the province or territory where it took place. Officers are not authorized to go beyond the court order and request additional information to make the eligibility assessment. Adoption is not required if the conditions of R117(1)(f) apply; the child is automatically a member of the family class.

Guardianship and Kafala
A legal guardian is a person who has the legal authority and the duty to care for the personal interest of a child or adult. Guardianship and kafala do not sever the pre-existing legal parentage between the biological parents and the child, and do not create legal parentage between the child and the guardians. A child may have a legal guardian and still have a legal parent-child relationship with their birth parents. Since guardianship and kafala do not meet the definition of adoption under R3(2), a child under guardianship or a kafala arrangement are not considered a dependent child as it is defined under R2 and do not meet the applicable requirements to be sponsored under the family class.

For more information on guardianship and kafala arrangements, refer to the Humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) considerations: Assessment of guardianship and Kafala arrangements PDI.

Adult adoptions
Subsection R117(4) provides for sponsorship of a child who was adopted in an intercountry adoption situation when the child was 18 years of age or older. In such cases, the following requirements must be met:

the adoption must have been in accordance with the laws of the country where it took place;
if the sponsor was habitually residing in Canada at the time of the adoption, the adoption must also have been in accordance with the laws that apply to an adult adoption in the province or territory in which the sponsor was habitually residing;
a genuine parent-child-like relationship between the adoptive parent and the adopted adult must have existed in fact both at the time of the adoption and before the adopted adult turned 18 years of age;
the adoption must not have been entered into primarily for the purpose of gaining status or privilege under the IRPA.
Note: The 1993 Hague Convention does not apply to adult adoptions. Some provinces and territories limit adult adoption to situations where the child is a former foster child.

In order to be considered a member of the family class under subsection R117(1), a foreign national whose adoption took place when the person is 18 years of age or older must also satisfy the definition of a “dependent child” in section R2.

Applicants may be requested to provide additional evidence to prove that there was a genuine parent-child-like relationship before the applicant turned 18 years of age and at the time of the adoption.

Suspension or closure of intercountry adoptions by a province or territory
In certain circumstances, one or more P/T Central Authorities may decide that a suspension or closure of intercountry adoption programs with a specific country are necessary to protect children and their families in light of unethical or irregular activities in that country. Of primary concern are situations involving child abduction and trafficking, the removal of children from their families without proper parental consent, and situations where prospects for improvements of the child system in the country in the absence of international pressure appear remote.

Provinces and territories have jurisdiction over adoption and can individually suspend intercountry adoptions from certain countries without the consent of other provinces and territories or the federal government. In some cases, the Federal Central Authority works with the provincial and territorial Central Authorities to facilitate, to the extent possible, pan-Canadian decisions to suspend intercountry adoption activity with a given country.

The Federal Central Authority also works with provinces and territories to consider the lifting of a suspension when there is sufficient evidence of reform and safeguards to protect the best interests of children in the country.

When a suspension is imposed on intercountry adoptions from a specific country, provincial and territorial authorities decline to issue letters required for immigration and citizenship processing for approval of a case. These cases should be refused on the basis of non-approval by the province or territory.

For a list of countries on which a suspension or closure is imposed, please see Countries with adoption suspensions or restrictions.

Countries that restrict intercountry adoptions
A list of countries that restrict intercountry adoptions is available at Countries with adoption suspensions or restrictions. These are countries that have restricted intercountry adoptions in some way that impacts intercountry adoptions with Canada. Adoptions involving countries that restrict intercountry adoption may not have been processed as intercountry adoptions in the country of origin and may not have involved the provincial or territorial Central Authorities in Canada.

Humanitarian and compassionate considerations
In exceptional circumstances, foreign nationals who are inadmissible or who do not meet the requirements of the Act or Regulations may make a written request for exemptions from the Act or Regulations on the basis of humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) considerations under subsection A25(1), which takes into account the best interests of the child. Section A25(1) requires delegated officers to examine H&C factors at the applicant’s request, if no restrictions exist. In addition, officers may put the case forward to the appropriate delegated authority to approve the application on the basis of subsection A25.1 on their own initiative and without the applicant having specifically requested it. For further information, refer to the program delivery instructions: H&C considerations.

Footnotes
Footnote 1
The Implementation and Operation of the 1993 Intercountry Adoption Convention: Guide to Good Practice,

No. 1, Chapter 8.8.8, Accessed December 1, 2020, at  https://www.hcch.net/en/publications-and-studies/details4/?pid=4388

Return to footnote1referrer
Footnote 2
The Implementation and Operation of the 1993 Intercountry Adoption Convention: Guide to Good Practice,

No. 1, Chapter 7.2.1, Accessed December 1, 2020, at  https://www.hcch.net/en/publications-and-studies/details4/?pid=4388

Return to footnote2referrer
Footnote 3
The Implementation and Operation of the 1993 Intercountry Adoption Convention: Guide to Good Practice,

No. 1, Chapter 2.2.3, Accessed December 1, 2020,  at  https://www.hcch.net/en/publications-and-studies/details4/?pid=4388

Return to footnote3referrer
Footnote *
Please note that for the purposes of this document, PAP may include 1 or 2 individuals.

Intercountry adoptions: How the best interests of the child are determined through the process
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

This section provides policy and functional guidance for processing permanent residence applications under the family class in the case of intercountry adoptions. It explains:

the regulatory requirements for intercountry adoptions to be accepted for immigration purposes.
the role of officers in processing permanent residence applications under the family class in the case of intercountry adoptions.
the role of the provinces and territories in intercountry adoptions.
the steps taken outside the immigration process to determine that an adoption is in the best interests of a child, as per subsection 117(3) of Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR).
On this page
Best interests of the child
Home study conducted by a competent authority
Consent of the birth parents
Genuine parent-child relationship
In accordance with the laws of the place where the adoption took place
In accordance with the laws of the sponsor’s place of residence
Child trafficking and undue gain
Best interests of the child
Definition
The term “best interests of the child” is a concept found in many legal instruments that deal with children’s issues, such as the 1993 Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (Hague Convention) and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA), the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) and the Citizenship Act also make explicit reference to this principle and to the Hague Convention. The Hague Convention contains certain safeguards and requirements to ensure that adoptions take place in the best interests of the child and with respect for their fundamental rights. These requirements include the principle of subsidiarity (consider solutions in the country of origin first), ensuring the proper consents have been obtained (from the birth parents, guardians and, if of a suitable age, the child themselves), making sure the child is adoptable, thoroughly evaluating the prospective adoptive parent(s) (PAP), and matching the child with a suitable family who will be able to meet their needs. The provincial and territorial Central Authorities determine whether these requirements have been met in individual cases.

Evidence
Subsections 117(2) and 117(3) of the IRPR require that provincial and territorial (P/T) Central Authorities, and in the case of a child who resides in a State that is a party to the Hague Convention, the Central Authority of that State, each provide documentary evidence that they have determined that the adoption is in the best interests of the child. In the case of a child who resides in a State that is a party to the Hague Convention, this requirement is satisfied by a letter/notice of agreement (LOA/NOA) issued by the P/T Central Authority, and officers do not have the authority to substitute their own determination for that of the Central Authority. In the case of a child who resides in a non-Hague Convention country, the P/T Central Authority must still assess the best interests of the child and indicate, through a letter of no objection (LONO) to the adoption, whether this has been met. The determination of the best interests of the child is the responsibility of the country of origin and the P/T Central Authority. The officer does not have the authority to look behind this determination. The IRCC officer should accept the LOA/NOA or LONO as conclusive evidence that these requirements have been met.

If a LOA/NOA or LONO was not provided (no provincial/territorial letter has been provided, or a letter of no involvement, or “LONI”, was provided), a major requirement of 117(3) or 117(1)(g) has not been met. IRPR requires that the Central Authority approve the adoption in writing (R117(1)(g)(ii) and (iii)(B); R117(3)(e) and [f]). Without these written confirmations, major requirements of the provisions will be deemed unmet.

While IRPR applies these requirements to intercountry adoptions of children under the age of 18 that were completed outside Canada, the principles and spirit of the Hague Convention must also be respected in cases where the child is to be adopted in Canada. Therefore, in non-Hague Convention cases where the child is to be adopted in Canada (FC6), the requirements involving the best interests of the child under subsection R117(3) must still be taken into account.

Home study conducted by a competent authority
As a pre-condition to an adoption, an assessment of the PAP’s suitability to adopt is ordinarily undertaken by the P/T Central Authority of where they habitually reside.

For immigration purposes, the IRPR requires that in the case of an adoption of a child under 18 completed outside Canada, a home study be conducted by a competent authority in Canada or in the country where the adoption was finalized [R117(3)(a)]. In Canada, competent authorities include the P/T Central Authority and individuals authorized by those authorities, such as accredited social workers.

In accordance with R117(7), a LOA/NOA or a LONO from the province or territory approving the intercountry adoption provides conclusive evidence that a home study has been completed. An officer does not have the authority to question the conclusions or the validity of the home study as it falls under P/T jurisdiction.

For adoptions to be completed in Canada, the IRPR does not require that a home study be conducted, but it is typically required by the P/T Central Authority to assess the eligibility and suitability of the PAP. A LOA/NOA or a LONO confirms that a home study, if required in that P/T, has been completed.

A home study may not be required by the P/T Central Authority if they have no jurisdiction. Provinces and territories may have no jurisdiction in the following instances:

cases where the adoptive parents are not habitual residents of a province or territory at the time of the adoption; or
cases where the child to be adopted is over 18 years of age (unless the Article 17 letters have been exchanged between the State of origin and the receiving State before the child is 18 years of age).
If a LOA/NOA or a LONO has been provided, officers do not need to request a copy of the home study.

If a LOA/NOA or LONO was not provided, a major requirement of R117(3) or R117(1)(g) has not been met. IRPR requires that the Central Authority approve the adoption in writing (R117(1)(g)ii and iii)(B); R117(3)(e) and [f]). Without these written confirmations, major requirements of the provisions will be deemed unmet.

However, if the officer receives evidence that the requirement for a home study under R117(3)(a) has not been met after receiving the LOA/NOA or LONO, the officer shall suspend processing and provide the evidence to the P/T Central Authority, as per R117(8). Processing of the application shall be suspended until the P/T Central Authority confirms or revises its statement.

See the provincial notification letters PDI for further information on the requirements and types of notification letters issued by the P/T Central Authorities.

Consent of the birth parents
In all cases of applications for permanent residence involving an adopted child or child to be adopted, the free and informed consent of the birth parents must have been provided to the responsible adoption authorities [R117(3)(b)].

As per subsection R117(7), the LOA/NOA or the LONO from the P/T Central Authority is conclusive evidence that the requirement for the consent of the birth parents have been met.

If a LOA/NOA or LONO was not provided, a major requirement of R117(3) or R117(1)(g) has not been met. IRPR requires that the Central Authority approve the adoption in writing (R117(1)(g)ii and iii)(B); R117(3)(e) and [f]). Without these written confirmations, major requirements of the provisions will be deemed unmet.

If after receiving the LOA/NOA or LONO, the officer receives evidence that this requirement under R117(3)(b) has not been met, the officer shall suspend processing and provide the evidence to the P/T Central Authority, as per R117(8). Processing of the application shall be suspended until the P/T Central Authority confirms or revises its statement.

If after receiving the LOA/NOA or LONO, the officer has evidence that only one of the birth parents gave consent, when the consent of both parents is required under the law of the State of origin, the same process as above would apply.

Genuine parent-child relationship
As per subsection R117(7), except in the case of an adoption that was entered into primarily for the purpose of acquiring any status or privilege under the Act, the LOA/NOA or the LONO from the P/T Central Authority must be taken as conclusive evidence that the requirement in R117(3)(c) is met, in applications involving intercountry adoptions that took place when the child was under 18 years old.

If a LOA/NOA or LONO was not provided, a major requirement of R117(3) or R117(1)(g) has not been met. IRPR requires that the Central Authority approve the adoption in writing (R117(1)(g)ii and iii)(B); R117(3)(e) and [f]). Without these written confirmations, major requirements of the provisions will be deemed unmet.

In the case of the adoption of a child under 18, paragraph R117(3)(c) requires that an adoption create a genuine parent-child relationship. R117(3)(c) does require that, as per the provision of “adoption” under R3(2), the court order sever the pre-existing legal parent-child relationship. An adoption that creates both a legal parent-child relationship and severs the legal pre-existing one is called a “full adoption,” as opposed to a “simple adoption” which only creates a legal parent-child relationship without severing the pre-existing one. Canada does not recognize simple adoptions. Therefore, only a “full adoption” would meet the R3(2) interpretation of adoption, where a “simple adoption” would not satisfy this interpretation.

If, after receiving the LOA/NOA or LONO, the officer receives evidence that this requirement under R117(3)(c) has not been met, the officer shall suspend processing and provide the evidence to the P/T Central Authority, as per R117(8). Processing of the application shall be suspended until the P/T Central Authority confirms or revises its statement.

The other requirement in paragraph R117(3)(c) is that the adoption must also create a genuine parent-child relationship in fact. In considering whether they have evidence to provide to the Central Authorities, officers should turn their mind to whether, in reality/fact, the individual in question will take on the role as a parent to the child.

It should also be noted that the IRPR does not require severance of the “factual” relationship with the previous/biological parents. A factual relationship is a real, lived connection that exists in reality and in practice through shared experiences or history, while not necessarily existing in law. The child may continue to have a relationship with the birth parents and with any former siblings or relatives. The officer’s analysis should focus on whether the adoption has created a genuine parent-child relationship between the child and the adoptive parents.

In the case of an adult adoption that took place when the child was over 18, paragraph R117(4)(b) requires that a genuine parent-child-like relationship existed before the child reached the age of 18 as well as at the time of the adoption. IRCC officers are responsible for assessing this criterion and may request additional evidence from the applicant to prove that this requirement is met.

In accordance with the laws of the place where the adoption took place
The LOA/NOA or the LONO from the province or territory’s Central Authority issued in the context of intercountry adoptions is conclusive evidence that the requirements of R117(3)(d) have been met.

Each country has its own requirements and procedures for intercountry adoptions. The submission of a valid adoption order issued by the competent authority is satisfactory evidence that the applicable foreign legal adoption requirements have been met unless there is some information to the contrary.

Where a LOA/NOA or a LONO from a province or territory is not issued by the Central Authority because the adoption did not comply with the laws of the country where it occurred, the application may be refused on the basis that the requirements of R117(3)(d) have not been met, and therefore the child cannot be considered a member of the family class by virtue of the adoption.

There are circumstances where an intercountry adoption may not comply with the laws of the country where it took place, such as where:

the requirements of adoption laws are not strictly followed; or
the country does not authorize international adoptions or adoptions in general.
If after receiving the LOA/NOA or LONO, the officer receives evidence that the intercountry adoption does not comply with the laws of the country where it took place, the officer shall suspend processing and provide the evidence to the P/T Central Authority, as per R117(8). Processing of the application shall be suspended until the P/T Central Authority confirms or revises its statement.

In Québec, to give legal effect to non-Hague Convention adoptions completed abroad, the court in Québec must recognize the adoption after the child arrives in Canada. This process does not have any impact on immigration or citizenship processing. Quebec also issues a declaration for the purposes of paragraph 5.1(3)(a) of the Citizenship Act, that the adoption meets the requirements of Quebec law governing adoptions (Déclaration en vertu de la loi sur la citoyenneté). The declaration issued by Quebec should be considered in establishing whether the requirements of 5.1(3)(a) are met.

In accordance with the laws of the sponsor’s place of residence
Paragraph R117(3)(e) requires that adoptions conform to the laws of the place of habitual residence of the PAP, which in the case of intercountry adoptions referred to in this document, is Canada.

When the PAP is habitually resident in Canada, the adoption must comply with the applicable adoption laws of the P/T where the PAP resides. P/T Central Authorities are involved where the adoptive parents habitually reside in Canada when the adoption takes place.

The officer must determine whether or not the adoptive parents were habitual residents of a P/T of Canada at the time of the adoption for the purpose of R117(3)(e) to R117(3)(g), R117(g)(ii) and (iii), and R117(4)(a). Where the officer has any doubt as to whether the adoptive parents are considered residents of a P/T of Canada at the time of the adoption and thus whether they are subject to P/T adoption laws, they must seek confirmation by contacting the P/T Central Authority.

When determining which P/T Central Authority to contact, officers may refer to the sponsor’s current address or a previous address. P/T Central Authority contacts are listed here: Canadian Central Authority contacts.

For more information on habitual residence and the Hague Convention, please see the Note on Habitual Residence and the Scope of the 1993 Hague Convention (PDF, 9.8 MB).

If after receiving the LOA/NOA or LONO, the officer receives evidence that the intercountry adoption does not comply with the laws of the country where it took place, the officer shall suspend processing and provide the evidence to the P/T Central Authority, as per R117(8). Processing of the application shall be suspended until the P/T Central Authority confirms or revises its statement.

Child trafficking and undue gain
Paragraph R117(3)(g) requires that in the case of an intercountry adoption of a child that took place in a country not party to the Hague Convention, that there is no evidence that the adoption is for the purpose of child trafficking or undue gain within the meaning of the Hague Convention.

As per R117(7), the LONO from the P/T Central Authority is conclusive evidence that this requirement has been met.

If an officer has evidence that child trafficking has taken place or that there was undue gain in the process (a child was sold or improper financial gain took place), after a LONO has been issued, the officer shall suspend processing and provide the evidence to the P/T Central Authority as per R117(8). Processing of the application shall be suspended until the P/T Central Authority confirms or revises its statement.

Note: For information on the processing of an application for grant of citizenship for adopted persons under the Citizenship Act involving undue gain or child trafficking see 12.9. of CP 14 Child trafficking and undue gain (PDF, 1.2 MB).

Intercountry adoptions: Provincial notification letters
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

This section provides information about the types of provincial notification letters issued by the province or territory’s Central Authority, in the case of an intercountry adoption, and which one is required in each circumstance.

On this page
Provincial notification letters
Letter or notice of agreement
Letter of no objection
Provincial statement as conclusive evidence
Suspending processing after new evidence
Other provincial or territorial letters - Letter of no involvement
Visa Issuance
Adopted children (FC9) cases from countries party to the Hague Convention
Children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) cases from countries party to the Hague Convention
Adopted children (FC9) cases from countries not party to the Hague Convention
Children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) cases from countries not party to the Hague Convention
Provincial notification letters
Evidence that the adoption complies with the Hague convention or with the adoption laws of the province or territory (P/T) in which the prospective adoptive parent resides is stated in writing in a provincial or territorial notification letter.

As per subsection R117(7), a letter/notice of agreement (LOA/NOA) or a letter of no objection (LONO) to an adoption issued by a P/T Central Authority must be accepted by an officer as conclusive evidence that certain requirements of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) have been met.

In certain intercountry adoptions, a P/T Central Authority may issue a letter indicating that it was not involved in the adoption process. Known as a letter of no involvement (LONI), letter of no knowledge (LNK), or letter of no position (LNP), these letters are issued on a case-by-case basis and vary between P/T jurisdictions. While such letters may affirm that certain procedural steps were completed, they are not conclusive evidence that any IRPR requirements have been met and they indicate that the P/T has not approved the adoption. Each P/T may have specific protocols, as detailed in the P/T profiles. In these cases, the officer is required to ensure that the requirements of IRPR have been met.

Types of letters issued by the provinces and territories Central Authorities:
letter or notice of agreement (Hague adoptions)
letter of no objection (non-Hague adoptions)
letter of no involvement
Letter or notice of agreement
In cases where the country of origin is a signatory to the 1993 Hague Convention on the Protection of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption (Hague Convention), IRCC requests the LOA/NOA from the concerned P/T Central Authority, and the P/T Central Authority forwards it to the appropriate IRCC to the visa office (a copy is also sent to the Central Authority of the child’s country of habitual residence). This letter indicates that the P/T Central Authority and the prospective adoptive parent(s) agree to the adoption. The NOA establishes that the adoption conforms to the Hague Convention and fulfils the requirements of subparagraph R117(1)(g)(ii) for a child to be adopted in Canada (FC6) or paragraph R117(3)(f) for an adopted child (FC9), in addition to a certificate of conformity for FC9 applications.

Note: In addition to the LOA (Article 17c) from the P/T Central Authority, a certificate of conformity (Article 23) from the originating country is also required when processing applications for permanent residence under the family class for adopted children (FC9) from countries that are signatories to the Hague Convention. The certificate of conformity is necessary to provide evidence that R117(1)(g)(ii) or R117(3)(f) are met.

Where a final request has been made, in the absence of this document, IRCC officers should conclude that the requirements of R117 for Hague adoptions are not met (for adoptions with countries that have ratified the Hague Convention).

Letter of no objection
In cases where the country of origin is not a signatory to the Hague Convention and the adoptive parents reside in a Canadian province or territory at the time of the adoption, a LONO is requested from the P/T Central Authority confirming that they do not object to the adoption. The LONO indicates that the P/T Central Authority agrees to the adoption and that all of the requirements of the P/T and those of the country of origin have been met. It fulfills the requirements of R117(1)(g)(iii)(B) for a child to be adopted in Canada (FC6) and R117(3)(e) for an adopted child (FC9).

With respect to adopted children, the requirement for a LOA/NOA or LONO applies only to children adopted abroad by sponsors who are habitually resident in Canada. If a sponsor habitually resides in another country and an adoption takes place in that country, P/T Central Authorities have no jurisdiction.

Other provincial or territorial letters - Letter of no involvement
When an adoption takes place without the involvement of a P/T Central Authority, the P/T may issue a letter stating that they were not involved in the adoption. These letters are issued on a case-by-case basis and may differ from one jurisdiction to the other. For example, such a letter could be called “Letter of No Involvement”, “Letter of No Knowledge”, or “Letter of No Position.”

These letters may indicate that some requirements have been met (e.g. a home study has been completed) and/or may signal that, if the child is granted permanent resident status, the adoption will be recognized in the province or territory once the child arrives in Canada. Since the P/T Central Authority was not involved in the adoption process, such letter is not conclusive evidence that any requirements of the IRPR have been met.

A LONI carries no legal weight or value under IRPA or IRPR. Further, these letters mean that the P/T has neither approved nor chosen to object to the adoption, which is a requirement under R117(1)(g) or R117(3). In those circumstances, the requirements of R117(1)(g) or R117(3) are automatically not met. Therefore, the officer must conclude that the requirements of R117(1)(g) or R117(3) have not been met. The officer may decide to apply exemptions on the basis of humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) grounds, should they believe there are exceptional circumstances, and then evaluate the other requirements, if applicable.

For more information regarding each provincial or territorial legislation and requirements see provincial and territorial profile.

Provincial statement as conclusive evidence
As per subsection R117(7), an LOA/NOA or LONO issued by a P/T Central Authority is to be accepted by an officer as conclusive evidence that the requirements under R117(1)(g)(iii)(A) for a child to be adopted in Canada (FC6) or under R117(3)(a) to (e) and (g) for an adopted child (FC9) have been met.

Suspending processing after new evidence
After the written statement (a LOA/NOA or a LONO) issued by the Central Authority is provided to an officer, if the officer receives evidence that any of the following requirements (the list is not exhaustive) have not been met, the processing of the application shall be suspended:

the child was not legally available for adoption;
the birth parents did not give their free and informed consent to the adoption;
the adoption is for the purpose of child trafficking or undue gain within the meaning of the Hague Convention;
the adoption did not create a genuine parent-child relationship; or
the adoption was not in accordance with the laws of the place where the adoption took place.
The officer must provide that evidence to the P/T Central Authority who will either confirm or revise its written statement (see subsection R117(8) for additional details). The processing of the application shall be suspended until the Central Authority confirms or revises its written statement. If the P/T confirms that the LOA/NOA or LONO is still valid, the officer must accept it as “conclusive evidence” that the relevant requirements of the IRPR have been met.

It should be noted that the LOA/NOA or LONO does not indicate whether the otherwise valid adoption was entered into primarily for the purpose of obtaining status or privilege under the IRPA. An immigration officer is responsible for making this determination under subparagraph R117(1)(g)(i), paragraph R117(2)(b), or paragraph R117(4)(c).

Visa Issuance
Adopted children (FC9) cases where the child was adopted in a country party to the Hague Convention
Cases where, as part of an intercountry adoption, the child is adopted in another country are codified as FC9 cases in the Global Case Management System (GCMS). In these cases, a permanent resident visa (PRV) may not be issued to a child adopted from a country that has ratified or acceded to the Hague Convention without an LOA/NOA from the P/T Central Authority. However, a PRV may be issued if the officer determines that there are sufficient grounds for H&C considerations, and concludes that all of the requirements of R117(3) are not met.

When an LOA/NOA is received from the P/T Central Authority, officers must do the following:

verify that a home study has been approved by a provincial, territorial or other competent authority;
if satisfied with the LOA/NOA and the certificate of conformity, assess the child (applicant) against the eligibility criteria;
verify that immigration requirements are met and the adoption was not entered into primarily for the purpose of acquiring any status or privilege under the Act;
promptly notify the P/T Central Authority by email when the child meets immigration requirements;
verify that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada once the migration office has been notified by the P/T Central Authority that the adoption procedures are complete; and
check for additional documentation that may be required such as an exit permit issued by the authorities in the country of origin authorizing the child to leave.
The authority to take the child to Canada will be the final adoption order, once the adoption has been completed. Some countries may require additional documentation, such as an exit permit issued by the authorities in the country of origin authorizing the child to leave. All adoption cases under the Hague Convention must be approved by the Central Authority of the country of origin and the Central Authority of the receiving province or territory before a PRV may be issued. If the adoption was not approved by the P/T Central Authority (i.e. no LOA/NOA was issued), sponsors should be advised to contact the P/T Central Authority. If the Central Authority does not approve the adoption, the officer must refuse the application as it does not comply with paragraph R117(3)(f), unless the officer determines there are sufficient grounds for H&C exemption.

Adopted children (FC9) cases where the child was adopted in a country not party to the Hague Convention
Cases where, as part of an intercountry adoption, the child is adopted in another country are codified as FC9 cases in GCMS. In these cases, officers may not issue a PRV to a child adopted from a country that has not ratified or acceded to the Hague Convention without a LONO from the P/T Central Authority. However, a PRV may be issued if the officer determines that there are sufficient grounds for H&C considerations, and concludes that all of the requirements of R117(3) are not met.

Officers should verify that the child has a valid travel document and that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada. A PRV should be issued if the child meets all immigration requirements. Officers should advise the P/T Central Authority that a PRV will be issued.

In cases of adoption involving countries not party to the Hague Convention, the requirements of subsections R117(2) and (3), including those pertaining to child trafficking, undue gain and adoption of convenience must be met.

When a LONO is received from the P/T Central Authority, officers must do the following:

verify that a home study has been approved by a provincial, territorial or other competent authority;
if satisfied with the LONO, assess the child (applicant) against the eligibility criteria;
verify that immigration requirements are met and the adoption was not entered into primarily for the purpose of acquiring any status or privilege under the Act;
promptly notify the P/T Central Authority by email when the child meets immigration requirements;
verify that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada with the final adoption order/judgement; and
check for additional documentation that may be required, such as an exit permit issued by the authorities in the country of origin authorizing the child to leave.
Note: There is no requirement to produce a Certificate of Conformity by the country of origin for non-Hague adoptions.

Children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) cases from countries party to the Hague Convention
Cases where, as part of an intercountry adoption, the child is brought to Canada for the adoption to be finalized are codified as FC6 cases in GCMS. In these cases, a PRV may not be issued to a child adopted from a country that has ratified or acceded to the Hague Convention without an LOA/NOA from the P/T Central Authority. However, a PRV may be issued if the officer determines that there are sufficient grounds for H&C considerations, and concludes that all of the requirements of R117(1)(g) are not met.

When an LOA/NOA is received from the P/T Central Authority, officers must do the following:

verify that a home study has been approved by a provincial, territorial or other competent authority;
if satisfied with the LOA/NOA, assess the child (applicant) against the eligibility criteria;
verify that immigration requirements are met and the adoption was not entered into primarily for the purpose of acquiring any status or privilege under the Act;
promptly notify the P/T Central Authority by email when the child meets immigration requirements;
verify that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada once the migration office has been notified by the P/T Central Authority that the child’s transfer to the adoptive parents is complete; and
check for additional documentation that may be required, such as an exit permit issued by the authorities in the country of origin authorizing the child to leave.
The authority to take the child to Canada will be the custody order/decision on the child’s placement (legal or administrative). Some countries may require additional documentation, such as an exit permit issued by the authorities in the country of origin authorizing the child to leave. All adoption cases under the Hague Convention must be approved by the Central Authority of the country of origin and the receiving P/T before a PRV may be issued. If the adoption was not approved by the P/T Central Authority (i.e. no LOA/NOA was issued), officers should send a request letter to the sponsor, advising them to contact the P/T Central Authority for the LOA/NOA. If the Central Authority does not approve the adoption, the officer must refuse the application as it does not comply with subparagraph R117(1)(g)(ii), unless the officer determines there are sufficient grounds for H&C exemption.

Note: A certificate of conformity is not required for FC6 applications as the adoption has not been finalized by the country of origin.

Children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) cases from countries not party to the Hague Convention
Cases where, as part of an intercountry adoption, the child is brought to Canada for the adoption to be finalized are codified as FC6 cases in GCMS. In these cases, officers may not issue a PRV to a child to be adopted from a country that has not ratified or acceded to the Hague Convention without a LONO from the P/T Central Authority. However, a PRV may be issued if the officer determines that there are sufficient grounds for H&C considerations, and concludes that all of the requirements of R117(1)(g) are not met.

Officers should verify that the child has a valid travel document and that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada. A permanent resident visa should be issued if the child meets all immigration requirements. Officers should advise the P/T Central Authority that a PRV will be issued.

In cases of children to be adopted in Canada (FC6) from a country not party to the Hague Convention, the requirements of paragraph R117(1)(g), including those pertaining to child trafficking, undue gain and adoption of convenience must be met.

When a LONO is received from the P/T Central Authority, officers must do the following:

verify that a home study has been approved by a provincial, territorial or other competent authority;
if satisfied with the LONO, assess the child (applicant) against the eligibility criteria;
verify that immigration requirements are met and the adoption was not entered into primarily for the purpose of acquiring any status or privilege under the Act;
promptly notify the P/T Central Authority by email when the child meets immigration requirements;
verify that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada via the custody order/decision on the child’s placement (legal or administrative);
check for additional documentation that may be required, such as an exit permit issued by the authorities in the country of origin authorizing the child to leave.
Although the IRPR does not explicitly require that there be a home study in cases where the child is to be adopted in Canada, the Hague Convention requires that the Central Authority in the receiving state ensure that prospective adoptive parents are eligible and suitable to adopt. Provincial and territorial Central Authorities normally require that prospective adoptive parents residing in Canada undergo a home study either for adoptions completed in the state of origin or in their province or territory, and that the provincial or territorial Central Authority confirm that a home study has been completed in their LONO or LOA/NOA.

The spirit of the Hague Convention must also be respected in non-Hague Convention cases. As a result, the requirements involving the best interests of the child in subsection R117(3) must be taken into account for non-Hague Convention FC6 cases.

Intercountry adoptions: The application process
This section contains policy, procedures and guidance used by IRCC staff. It is posted on the department’s website as a courtesy to stakeholders.

This section provides functional guidance for processing permanent residence applications under the family class in the case of intercountry adoptions.

On this page
Processing immigration applications for adopted children
Role of the case processing centre
Sponsorships of unnamed children
Changing a child’s name in the IMM 1344 form
Requesting a letter or notice of agreement or a letter of no objection
Multiple adoptions
Role of the migration office
Probationary periods
Permanent Resident Visa issuance
Parents fully and reliably informed about all aspects of a child’s medical condition
Assess admissibility
Reconfirm eligibility
Requirements specific to Hague Convention cases
Regulatory requirements for adoptions to be accepted for immigration purposes
Making a final decision
Processing immigration applications for adopted children
Sponsorship applications for intercountry adoptions, where the prospective adoptive parent (PAP) is habitually resident in Canada and the adoption has been finalized in the country of origin of the child, or where the adoption is to be finalized in Canada, are given priority processing alongside other Family Class Priority (FCP) categories such as FC1, FCC and FC3.

Officers must determine the sponsor’s province or territory (P/T) of habitual residence in Canada. When it is not clear, the officer must consult with the P/T Central Authority to determine the sponsor’s habitual residence based on an assessment of all the circumstances of the case. Contact information for the P/T Central Authorities can be found here: Adoption authorities contacts.

In cases where it is determined that the sponsor does not habitually reside in Canada, the P/T Central Authorities do not have jurisdiction and cannot provide a letter of no objection or letter or notice of agreement (LOA/NOA).

A person who wishes to sponsor a member of the family class is required to habitually reside in Canada, as per paragraph R130(1)(b). Subsection R130(2) provides an exception for Canadian citizens residing abroad who sponsor a foreign national that is their spouse, common-law partner, conjugal partner, or dependent child who has no dependent children, provided the sponsor will reside in Canada when the sponsored person becomes a permanent resident.

This exception does not apply to children to be adopted in Canada under paragraph R117(1)(g). In such cases, the sponsor must reside in Canada at the time of application, as the child is not yet considered a dependent child under IRPR until the adoption is finalized.

For more information, refer to Intercountry adoptions: Concepts and best practices.

Role of the case processing centre
Applications to sponsor a child adopted in another country (FC9) or a child to be adopted in Canada (FC6) in connection with an intercountry adoption must be submitted to the case processing centre (CPC) in Canada. The CPC will make a decision on the sponsorship application and issue instructions for medical examination.

Sponsorships of unnamed children
Subsection 10(2.1) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) allows the submission of sponsorship and permanent residence applications for intercountry adoption cases where the child had not yet been identified (unknown child). In other words, the application can be submitted, and the approval process starts before certain required information is available.

Some sponsors (the PAP) may not have the full name and date of birth of the child to be adopted at the time of application. Sponsors should complete both the sponsorship application and the permanent resident application for their child with as much information as possible. If the name of the child is not yet known, sponsors should leave the name field blank.

The CPC processes applications to sponsor unnamed children the same way as it does those for named children. CPC staff are encouraged to create unnamed children applications in the Global Case Management System (GCMS) by using the information included in the IMM 0008 form received with the sponsorship application as follows:

Sponsorships of unnamed children
Family name	the sponsor’s last name(s)
Given name	blank, “baby”, or “child”
Date of birth of child	**asterisks**
Gender	unknown
It is the sponsor’s responsibility to notify the appropriate migration office once the child is identified. IRCC staff will update the name of the child in the application originally created in GCMS, as well as the child’s Unique Client Identifier (UCI). Name records for both the child’s name at birth (according to the original birth certificate or adoption judgment) and the child’s name following the adoption should be noted.

Changing a child’s name in the IMM 1344 form
If a sponsored child is no longer available for adoption, sponsors may ask the CPC to replace the name of the child on the IMM 1344 form with the name of another child. The CPC must provide the new name to the migration office and the P/T Central Authority.

If the sponsor contacts the migration office first, they should advise the sponsor to provide the name of the new child and a new IMM 1344 form to the CPC and the P/T Central Authority.

The CPC will not charge a new processing fee when it replaces a name for this reason.

Requesting a letter or notice of agreement or a letter of no objection
A LOA/NOA or a LONO is not required to begin processing the sponsorship application. On receipt of a sponsorship application, CPC staff verify completion of the application and send a letter to the P/T Central Authority requesting issuance of either a LOA/NOA (Hague Convention cases) or a LONO (non-Hague Convention cases). For additional information on provincial notification letters, see the provincial notification letters PDI.

There is no requirement for a P/T letter for children adopted outside Canada in cases where adoptive parents were not habitually residing in a Canadian P/T at the time of the adoption, as the P/T Central Authorities have no jurisdiction when the adoptive parents do not habitually reside in Canada.

In cases where the sponsor is a Canadian citizen and is not habitually residing in Canada, officers must check for documentation to show that the sponsor intends to reside in Canada when permanent residence is granted to the child. For additional information on determinations of habitual residence, see the relevant section of the Intercountry Adoptions: Concepts and Best Practices PDI.

Multiple adoptions
Cases may arise where a sponsorship application in support of a child to be adopted (FC6 or FC9) is still pending for one unnamed child, and the sponsor is notified that the birth resulted in multiple children or that there are other siblings available for adoption. If the sponsor wants to adopt the second or more than one child they must complete a separate IMM 1344 form for each child for submission to the CPC with the required documents. CPC staff should review the portal and GCMS for additional applications submitted by the same sponsor and/or co-signer, if applicable.

Payment of fees for all additional new applications is required.

Dual applications for citizenship process and Immigration process
In the event that a sponsor submits an application for the same adopted person under both the Citizenship Act and the IRPA simultaneously, the processing office will send the sponsor a letter asking them to choose which application they want to pursue. If they do not provide instructions as to which application they wish to pursue within thirty (30) days, the citizenship application will be assessed first. If Canadian citizenship is granted, the sponsorship application will be considered as having been withdrawn and the applicable processing fees and the Right of Permanent Residence Fee (RPRF) will be refunded, if paid.

For additional instructions regarding processing simultaneous applications for the same adopted person under both the Citizenship Act and the IRPA, see CP 14 (PDF, 1.2 MB) section 7.4.

Role of the migration office
Once it has been determined that the sponsor is eligible and meets all sponsorship requirements, the CPC will forward the application for permanent residence to the applicable migration office, who will assess the applicant’s eligibility and membership in the family class, admissibility and ultimately render a final decision.

The following documents must be provided to the migration office:

identity documents for the child
final adoption order for an adopted child/FC9 application
custody order/a decision on the child’s placement (legal or administrative) issued to the prospective adoptive parents (sponsor) for the purpose of adoption to be completed in Canada (FC6)
passport or travel document for the child
Officers may also request documents such as a birth certificate to establish the birth parents of the child.

For additional information on the assessment of an application for permanent residence under the family class, see Assessment of an application for permanent residence.

Officers must be satisfied that the adoption is not an adoption of convenience.

Requirements specific to Hague Convention cases
Certificate of Conformity
For adopted child (FC9) applications, the Certificate of Conformity (Article 23), issued by the country of origin’s Central Authority, must be requested in addition to the LOA/NOA (Article 17) from the P/T Central Authority. The officer must request the Certificate of Conformity from the P/T Central Authority after the adoption has been finalized in the child’s country of origin and all Hague requirements have been met.

There is no requirement to produce a Certificate of Conformity by the country of origin for non-Hague adoptions or for a child to be adopted in Canada (FC6) application.

Probationary periods
The Hague Convention permits countries of origin to require a probationary period where the child and prospective adoptive parents (PAPs) reside together before the adoption is finalized. This period serves to ensure that the adoption is in the best interests of the child and that the placement is successful before the adoption is finalized. Once the probationary period has been successfully completed the adoption order is then issued by either the child’s country of origin or the Canadian provincial or territorial court, depending on the requirements set by the country of origin. Probationary periods are determined by the requirements of the country of origin and can vary in length from a few days to a 1-year period or more. These periods may take place in either Canada or in the child’s country of origin. The following sections outline these two distinct scenarios.

Probationary period and adoption finalized in Canada
Certain countries, such as the Philippines, require a probationary period in Canada. Once the probationary period is successfully completed, the adoption is finalized in Canada in a provincial or territorial court. As the adoption is finalized in Canada, these applications are processed under the “child to be adopted in Canada” category under R117(1)(g) and coded as “FC6” in GCMS.

Probationary period in Canada and adoption finalized in country of origin
Certain countries, such as Thailand, require a probationary period in Canada, but the final adoption order is issued in the child’s country of origin after the probationary period is completed. In these cases, the children are not considered adopted in Canada under R117(1)(g) and therefore do not fall under the FC6 category.

Permanent Resident Visa Issuance
Parents fully and reliably informed about all aspects of a child’s medical condition
For applications to sponsor an adopted child or child to be adopted in Canada, the sponsoring PAP must provide a written statement (form IMM 0133) acknowledging that they have obtained information about the medical condition of the child, in accordance with R118.

An officer must be in receipt of this statement before a permanent resident visa may be issued. A medical condition statement is issued to the sponsoring PAP with other permanent resident application material. The sponsoring PAP is instructed to sign and return the statement to the IRCC office when they have obtained medical information concerning the child.

Assess admissibility
After applicants are found to be members of the family class, they must be assessed for admissibility. Officers must be satisfied that applicants are not inadmissible.

If the principal applicant is inadmissible to Canada, the application should be refused. The applicant may make a written request for exemptions based on humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) considerations under subsection 25(1) of IRPA, or officers may put the case forward to the delegated authority to approve the application based on subsection 25.1 on their own initiative.

Reconfirm eligibility
At visa issuance, officers must still be satisfied that applicants and their family members [R1(3)], whether accompanying or not, are admissible and otherwise meet all of the family class requirements of A11(1) as follows:

they must have an eligible relative who meets the requirements for sponsorship
they must prove their identity, age and relationship to their sponsor and meet the requirements of the family class
the applicant and their family members must be admissible
they must have valid and subsisting passports or travel documents
they must be coming to Canada to establish permanent residence
Note: Applicants and family members must meet eligibility requirements for the duration of processing, i.e. continuously, from when the application is received until final decision.

Note: If an application is refused on the basis that the child is not a dependent child of the sponsor, for example, and does not comply with the requirement that the P/T issue a LOA/NOA or a LONO as per R117(1)(g)(iii)(B) or R117(3)(e), the sponsor has a right of appeal. However, because the child to be adopted is not a member of the family class as described in R117(1), the Immigration Appeal Division (IAD) cannot grant relief based on Humanitarian and Compassionate considerations (H&C) (A65). The IAD may not consider H&C considerations unless it has decided that the foreign national is a member of the family class.

The applicant may make a written request for exemptions based on humanitarian and compassionate (H&C) considerations under subsection 25(1) of IRPA, or officers may put the case forward to the delegated authority to approve the application based on subsection 25.1 on their own initiative. For more information, refer to H&C considerations: Assessment and processing.

If an officer receives new evidence that the applicant does not meet the requirements after the LOA/NOA or LONO has been issued, the officer must suspend processing and provide that evidence to the P/T Central Authority. For more information on suspending processing after new evidence is received, see: Intercountry Adoptions: Provincial Notification Letters.

Requirements for visa issuance in Hague Convention cases
A permanent resident visa (PRV) may not be issued to a child adopted from a country that has ratified or acceded to the Hague Convention without a LOA/NOA from the P/T Central Authority. Additionally, a PRV may not be issued to a child adopted from a country not party to the Hague Convention without a LONO from the P/T Central Authority. However, a PRV may be issued if the officer determines that there are sufficient grounds for H&C considerations or if the child meets the requirements of R117(1)(f).

Officers should verify that the child has a valid travel document and that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada. A PRV should be issued if the child meets all immigration requirements.

Prior to issuing the PRV, officers must confirm that the P/T Central Authority has not suspended adoptions from the child’s country of origin, and that the country of origin has not imposed restrictions on intercountry adoption. For more information on suspensions and restrictions on adoptions, see Intercountry adoption concepts and best practices.

If issuing a TRP for the probationary period, officers should verify that the child has a valid travel document and that the sponsor has the authority to take the child to Canada since the adoption has not been finalized. Once the adoption has been finalized and the child has met all immigration requirements, a PRV should be issued.

Note: A letter of no involvement (LONI) carries no legal weight or value under IRPA or IPRR. These letters mean that the P/T has neither approved nor chosen to object to the adoption, which is a stand-alone requirement under R117(1)(g) or R117(3). In those circumstances, the requirements of R117(1)(g) or R117(3) are automatically not met.

Please see the Intercountry Adoptions: Provincial Notification Letters PDI for requirements for visa issuance in intercountry adoption cases, including instructions on the procedures to follow when concerns arise after new evidence is received following the issuance of the LOA/NOA or LONO.

Regulatory requirements for adoptions to be accepted for immigration purposes
The table below outlines the regulatory requirements for each category.

Regulatory requirements for adoptions to be accepted for immigration purposes
Requirement	Adoption under 18 – completed abroad
[R117(2)]
[R117(3)]	Adoption under 18 – to be completed in Canada
[R117(1)(g)]	Adoption over 18
[R117(4)]	Regulation
Full adoption	Yes	Adoption will be completed in Canada	Yes	R3(2)
Home study	Yes	Not and IRPR requirementFootnote1 - but usually required by the province or territory’s Central Authority	No	R117(3)(a)
Free and informed consent of biological parents	Yes	Not and IRPR requirementFootnote2 - but usually required by the province or territory’s Central Authority	No	R117(3)(b)
Genuine parent-child relationship (In the case of an adoption over 18: before the child turned 18 and at the time of adoption)	Yes	No	Yes	R117(3)(c)
R117(4)(b)
Adoption in accordance with the laws of the place where the adoption took place	Yes	No	Yes	R117(3)(d)
R117(4)(a)
Adoption in accordance with laws of country of residence of adoptive parents	Yes	No	Yes	R117(3)(e)
R117(4)(a)
Notification in writing from the province or territory where the adoptive parents reside that the child is authorized to enter and reside permanently in the province or territory (non-Hague Convention countries)	Yes	Yes	No	R117(1)(g)(iii)(B)
Notification in writing that the country where the adoption took place and the province or territory of the adopted person’s intended residence approve the adoption as conforming to the Hague Convention (Hague Convention countries)	Yes	Yes	No	R117(1)(g)(ii)
R117(3)(f)
Meet spirit of Hague Convention (for adoptions involving non-Hague countries)	Yes	Yes	No	A3(3)(f)
R117(1)(g)(ii)
R117(1)(g)(iii)(A)
R117(3)(f)
R117(3)(g)
No evidence of undue gain or child trafficking	Yes	Yes	No	R117(1)(g)(iii)(A)
R117(3)(g)
Adoption not entered into primarily for the purpose of acquiring a status or privilege (not an adoption of convenience)	Yes	Yes	Yes	R117(1)(g)(i)
R117(2)(b)
Child placed for adoption or otherwise legally available for adoption	No	Yes (in non-Hague Convention cases)	No	R117(1)(g)(iii)(A)
Adoptive parents have signed a statement stating that they have information on the child’s medical condition	Yes	Yes	No	R118
Making a final decision
Admissibility and final decisions on applications in family class
See also:
Assessment of an application for permanent residence
Processing Quebec cases
Footnotes
Footnote 1
Although not within the jurisdiction of the IRPR, a home study is usually required by provincial and territorial central adoption authorities for adoptions to be completed in Canada. See Intercountry adoptions: How the best interests of the child are determined through the process PDI for more information.

Return to footnote1referrer
Footnote 2
Although not within the jurisdiction of the IRPR, a home study is usually required by provincial and territorial central adoption authorities for adoptions to be completed in Canada. See Intercountry adoptions: How the best interests of the child are determined through the process PDI for more information.

